Combat AI With AI: Counteract Machine-Generated Fake
Restaurant Reviews on Social Media
Alessandro Gambetti
Nova School of Business and Economics
Carcavelos, Portugal
gambetti.alessandro@novasbe.pt
Qiwei Han
Nova School of Business and Economics
Carcavelos, Portugal
qiwei.han@novasbe.pt
ABSTRACT
Recent advances in generative models such as GPT may be used to
fabricate indistinguishable fake customer reviews at a much lower
cost, thus posing challenges for social media platforms to detect
these machine-generated fake reviews. We propose to leverage the
high-quality elite restaurant reviews verified by Yelp to generate
fake reviews from the OpenAI GPT review creator and ultimately
fine-tune a GPT output detector to predict fake reviews that signif-
icantly outperforms existing solutions. We further apply the model
to predict non-elite reviews and identify the patterns across several
dimensions, such as review, user and restaurant characteristics, and
writing style. We show that social media platforms are continuously
challenged by machine-generated fake reviews, although they may
implement detection systems to filter out suspicious reviews.
KEYWORDS
AI-generated Content, Natural Language Generation, Fake Review
Detection, GPT, Social Media
1
INTRODUCTION
Online reviews have served as valuable signals about product qual-
ity that may bridge information asymmetries between customers
and sellers in online marketplaces, which in turn influence cus-
tomer purchases [17, 30, 56, 79]. Fake reviews can be defined as
opinion-based disinformation, which is fabricated and propagated
by spammers with the ambition of misleading and deceiving cus-
tomers [59]. With the prevalence of review systems embedded in
social media, such as Tripadvisor, Yelp, and Facebook, fake reviews
are also witnessed to proliferate on these platforms, aiming to mis-
lead customers by pretending to be authentic, in order to achieve
unjustly competitive gains for certain businesses given the low cost
and high monetary gain [34, 56, 58]. The COVID-19 pandemic may
further exacerbate the issue because many less-experienced cus-
tomers are forced to make more online purchases and tend to rely
on reviews more heavily [53]. According to a report from World
Economic Forum, fake reviews’ economic impact on global online
spending has reached $152 billion in recent years [51].
Given that the fundamental value of reviews is rooted in their
authenticity that reflects customers’ truthful experience, fake re-
views would not only harm customers but also severely threaten
to erode their trust in online reviews and damage the reputation
of social media [25, 49]. Typically, [25] showed that there exists a
market of fake reviews, and sellers choose to rely on paid review
farms for content creation. To this end, major platforms propose
countermeasures to fight review fraud with both manual analyses
by the content moderation team and automated systems. For exam-
ple, since 2019, Tripadvisor has started to publish the transparency
report outlining its effort to keep fake reviews off the site. The
most recent report in 2021 revealed that over 2 million (3.6%) of
reviews were determined to be fraudulent [78]. In a similar vein,
Yelp implemented an automated recommendation software to filter
off 4.3 million suspicious reviews out of 19.6 million reviews and
only displayed the most reliable and helpful reviews on the main
business pages [53]. However, social media still face significant chal-
lenges to counteract machine-generated fake reviews effectively
due to advances in generative models such as GPT models [55].
On the one hand, fake reviews fabricated by AI systems trained on
real reviews have become essentially indistinguishable. One study
showed that machine-generated fake reviews could evade human
detection and even receive a higher score of perceived usefulness
compared to reviews written by humans [90]. On the other hand,
the cost of machine-generated reviews is considerably lower than
buying from sellers of human-crafted fake reviews.
Overall, there is a large body of literature aimed at detecting,
explaining, and analyzing how user-generated fake reviews impact
social media platforms [59, 87]. However, no effort has been directed
toward explaining, under different heterogeneous metrics, how
fake AI-generated reviews have been affecting such platforms thus
far, leaving a critical research gap in the literature. In this paper,
we aim to detect and identify the patterns in machine-generated
fake restaurant reviews fabricated from high-quality elite reviews
on Yelp. As we leverage elite reviews that are verified by Yelp to
generate fake reviews using OpenAI’s GPT-3 model, our survey
results show that humans cannot distinguish AI-generated fake
reviews effectively. Furthermore, we implement several fake review
detection models and find that the fine-tuned GPT-3 model on our
proposed dataset achieves the best performance. Lastly, instead of
using filtered reviews as the proxy for fake reviews, we choose
to evaluate non-filtered reviews more rigorously, by examining
potential fake reviews that are not identified by the Yelp system
across several dimensions, including review characteristics, user
characteristics, restaurant characteristics, and writing style.
Through ANOVA, we conducted a study that distinguished be-
tween AI-generated fake reviews and authentic reviews across
each dimension. Our analysis revealed that the average rating of
fake AI-generated reviews is higher, and they are typically posted
by users with less established reputations. Furthermore, fake re-
views are comparatively easier to comprehend than authentic ones.
Importantly, we also utilized official foot-traffic mobility data to
demonstrate that fake AI-generated reviews are more commonly as-
sociated with restaurants that receive fewer customer visits, which
is a reliable indicator of restaurant demand. To the best of our knowl-
edge, no prior study effectively established a correlation between
fake reviews and customer visits.
arXiv:2302.07731v3  [cs.CL]  21 Apr 2023

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a compre-
hensive review of the relevant literature regarding the influence
and identification of fake reviews on social media platforms. Section
3 outlines the supervised learning approaches used to detect and
analyze fake reviews across multiple attributes. In Section 4, the
findings are presented, followed by a discussion in Section 5, which
links back to the existing literature and highlights any limitations
encountered. Lastly, Section 6 concludes the paper.
2
LITERATURE REVIEW
2.1
Impact of Fake Reviews in Online Markets
Different economic agents including retailers and platforms are
known for manipulating online reviews [21, 28, 40]. For example,
motivated by financial incentives, online merchants are inclined to
distribute fake positive reviews for their own products or fake nega-
tive reviews against competitors’ products [13, 59, 86]. Also, online
platforms have the propensity to circulate fake reviews to augment
website traffic to promote customer engagement [40]. Remarkably,
individual users might also post fake content for reward-seeking
purposes [2, 77, 84]. Overall, fake reviews weaken informative-
ness and information quality [97], damaging review credibility and
helpfulness [1, 72, 73, 83, 97, 99], which are the main factors new
consumers take into account when browsing reviews before mak-
ing purchase decisions. Additionally, extant research has demon-
strated that the proliferation of fake reviews increases consumer
uncertainty [32, 99], inducing customer distrust towards online
reviews [15, 18, 100], undermining consumers’ purchase intentions
[19, 54, 89, 100]. Specifically, in the context of Yelp, [19] executed an
interdisciplinary study leveraging both qualitative and quantitative
research methods such as surveys and linear models, respectively,
showing that, from the output of univariate models only, consumers’
exact knowledge of review fraud is statistically significantly con-
nected to increased intentions to use Yelp as a tool before making
purchase decisions.
2.2
Fake Reviews Characteristics and Detection
Recent literature examined how fake reviews differed from legit
ones across several characteristics such as writing style (e.g. read-
ability and sentiment), ratings, restaurant characteristics, and user
behavior. For each characteristic, we succinctly discuss its relevant
related work.
2.2.1
Writing Style. [37] posited that reviews’ readability serves
as a proxy for their helpfulness, as consumers must first read and
then comprehend the text to assess their usefulness. Empirical re-
search has further demonstrated that the likelihood of a review
being deemed helpful increases when it is presented in an easily
comprehensible manner [9]. Hence, several studies theorized that
fraudsters might deliberately disseminate simple fake content to
quickly catch readers’ attention [1, 42, 80], conceptualizing that
fake reviews were easier to comprehend. Empirically, leveraging
readability metrics such as the Automated Readability Index [69],
[22] found that fake deceptive reviews exhibited less writing com-
plexity as compared to truthful ones. However, no unanimous aca-
demic consensus has been established on this finding, because other
studies employing comparable methodologies showed the opposite
result [3, 91].
Also, textual review sentiment has been investigated for its effec-
tiveness and helpfulness [67, 76]. As for fake reviews, consumers
realized that more polarized sentiment tones could be surrogates
for suspicious user-generated content [43]. For example, leverag-
ing statistical tools such as standard t-tests and generalized linear
models, prior research discovered that fake reviews were richer in
positive cues as compared to authentic ones [3, 91]. Additionally,
[41] adopted machine learning techniques to identify review spam,
concluding that mixed or neutral sentiments were associated with
truthful reviews. Also, employing ranking classification models,
[44] described how spammers are not capable of expressing true
sentiment when writing fake reviews, leading to more polarized
opinions in the end.
2.2.2
Ratings and Restaurant Characteristics. Extreme senti-
ment polarity was also detected when considering review ratings
[48], which are a robust representative of sentiment as well. In
particular, extant literature affirmed that positive fake reviews were
more prevalent than negative ones [39, 94]. For example, [39] found
that 56% of fake reviews were positive (4-5 stars) and that 29% were
negative (1-2 stars). One hypothesis that may ex-post explain the
prevalence of positive fake content could be that a one-star in-
crease in the Yelp restaurant average rating is associated with a
5-9% revenue growth [47]. As far as restaurant characteristics, [48]
examined how fake restaurant reviews were present on Yelp. They
found that about 16% of the reviews were filtered out as fake or
suspicious, and that restaurants with fewer associated reviews were
more likely to submit positive fake reviews to enhance their repu-
tation. [48] also segmented restaurants into chain (e.g. McDonald’s,
Burger King, Subway, etc.) and non-chain, finding the former ones
less likely to display positive fake content, because their revenue
is not significantly affected by their rating [47], and because they
may incur high reputation costs if caught [52].
2.2.3
User Behavior. Fake reviews can also be identified by user
behavior, i.e. spammers’ characteristics. For example, [66] describe
the concept of singleton reviews, which is the phenomenon of users
posting only one fake review. Because of that one-to-one relation-
ship, spotting and tracking activities of singleton review spammers
is challenging [63, 88]. [5] defined four subsets of user-centric fea-
tures to analyze Yelp reviews: personal profile features (e.g. profiles
description), social interaction features (e.g., user number of friends),
review activity features (e.g. number of previous reviews), and trust
information features (e.g. number of photos posted). Here, they
leveraged supervised machine learning techniques to classify fake
versus authentic reviews, showing that review activity features were
the most relevant in terms of classification accuracy. Inherent to our
paper, they also described how accounts associated with consistent
spamming of fake user-generated content displayed fewer friends,
fewer photos posted, and fewer reviews as compared to accounts
conducting a genuine activity. Strengthening this finding, [48] also
confirmed that fake reviews were more likely to be posted by users
with less established reputations, as determined by fewer friends
and reviews published.
2

2.2.4
Detection. Human evaluators were found to systematically
fail at distinguishing user-generated fake reviews from genuine
ones [13]. For example, [57] surveyed members of the general public
to detect fake reviews, finding that the best human judge achieved
an accuracy of 65%. Inherently, [58] found a similar result for the
same task amounting to 61% accuracy. Also, [60] and [74] recorded
comparable human performance in similar experimental settings,
with humans achieving average accuracy detection rates of 57% and
52%, respectively. Such findings demonstrate that humans perform
at an accuracy level comparable to random guessing. In contrast,
fake reviews detection, viewed as a binary "spam versus non-spam"
[34] or "fake versus non-fake" [82] supervised learning problem,
showed promising results. Models such as logistic regression [36,
45], naive Bayes [27, 45, 95], random forest [93], and XGBoost
[24] served as valuable benchmarks for more sophisticated models
such as deep convolutional neural networks [64, 98] and recurrent
neural networks [98]. Also, large language models (LLM) such
as GPT-2 or RoBERTa, depending on the attention mechanism
[81] have been employed in spam detection tasks [33, 65]. For
example, as early as 2011, [58] achieved detection accuracy rates
above 85% with models such as naive Bayes out of sample. More
recently, [65] achieved 97% F1-score with a RoBERTa transformer
in a comparable experimental setting. These findings demonstrate
how natural language processing and machine learning techniques
outperform human capabilities with a high degree of accuracy and
efficiency in terms of identifying patterns and trends in the fake
review detection domain.
3
METHODOLOGY
In this section, we describe the methodology used. We explain how
we: (1) collected data and generated fake GPT-3 reviews, (2) asked
human judges and implemented machine learning algorithms to
detect them, and (3) inferred and explained the predictions of fake
versus non-fake reviews on a set of unverified reviews. Figure 1
illustrates the GPT-3 pipeline from fake review generation to de-
tection. As of 2022, GPT-3 is a state-of-the-art natural language
processing model developed by OpenAI that has gained consider-
able attention due to its impressive performance in a wide range
of language-related tasks [8]. Its ability to learn the patterns and
structures of language at an unprecedented scale has enabled the
model to generate coherent and contextually relevant text that is
often indistinguishable from that written by humans. The power
and versatility of GPT-3 make it a valuable methodology for both
text generation and detection. It is necessary to highlight that a
successful application of GPT-3 models is the recent introduction
of ChatGPT, a chatbot that leverages their architecture to engage in
human-like conversations and provide support to users in question-
answering tasks. However, the wide accessibility and (current) nil
usage costs of ChatGPT may also enhance the capabilities of ma-
licious actors to generate fraudulent content to be disseminated
on social media platforms. This raises concerns about the poten-
tial misuse of GPT-3-based models and underscores the need for
vigilant monitoring and control of its applications.
Figure 1: We leveraged OpenAI’s GPT-3 Davinci and Curie
models to create a dataset of fake reviews. Prompts were
elite reviews posted by elite users. Therefore, the generated
dataset contained equally balanced real elite and fake re-
views. To classify them accurately, we fine-tuned a GPT-Neo
(GPT-3 equivalent) model, which was used to predict the
probability of non-elite reviews being AI-generated.
3.1
Data Collection
We accessed the 2021 to mid-2022 New York City restaurant mobil-
ity data from the company SafeGraph (https://www.safegraph.com)
to collect a dataset of restaurants. New York City was selected
because it offers a variety of restaurants serving distinct culinary
tastes within an international setting, thereby providing sufficient
heterogeneity for our study. Next, we scraped all restaurant-related
customer reviews from Yelp. In total, we collected 447,295 reviews
connected to 5,959 restaurants. Each example includes the review
text, the date it was posted, the rating, the poster’s Yelp elite status,
the poster’s number of previous reviews, and the poster’s number
of uploaded photos. Then, we enriched the data by (1) querying
the Yelp official API downloading restaurant-related variables (each
review was connected to) such as the average rating and the price
level, and (2) including the raw number of visits and the normalized
number of visits by the total visits (in the New York state) from
the original SafeGraph data. SafeGraph collects visit data by lever-
aging various data sources, including GPS signals, Wi-Fi signals,
and Bluetooth signals from visitors’ mobile devices. The company
uses a combination of these signals to determine the temporal lo-
cation of devices in the physical world, and then aggregates this
information to create a comprehensive dataset of visit information.
Overall, SafeGraph datasets have been extensively used in diverse
research domains, including public health [10], impact of mobility
restrictions and compliance [11], disease transmission patterns and
epidemiological simulations [25, 70], and estimation of alcohol sales
[31], among others.
3.2
Fake Reviews Generation
After collecting the main data, we used the OpenAI publicly avail-
able GPT-3 API to build a dataset of fake reviews (https://openai.
com/api). As of 2022, four different GPT-3 sub-models could be
3

chosen at different price rates: Ada (0.0004$ / 1K tokens), Babbage
(0.0005$ / 1K tokens), Curie (0.0020$ / 1K tokens), and Davinci
(0.0200$ / 1K tokens). Naturally, the higher the price rate, the more
accurate the model instruction-following. A higher price rate also
translates into larger model sizes, as measured by the number of
parameters, which are not officially disclosed by OpenAI. Simply
put, a larger number of parameters leads to increased performance.
We then randomly sampled 12,000 reviews from a total of 92,253
elite reviews (out of 447,295 total scraped reviews) representing
4,994 restaurants, and used the elite-sampled texts as prompts to
generate related fake reviews. Elite reviews are written by elite
users, who Yelp thoroughly verifies. According to Yelp, to apply
for an elite membership, a user is expected to have consistently
posted thoughtful reviews, uploaded beautiful pictures, and up-
voted others’ reviews. Therefore, we assume that elite reviews are
a reliable proxy of information reflecting real customers’ opinions.
As a prompt, we utilized the default template that OpenAI provides
for restaurant fake review generation:
"Write a restaurant review based on these notes:
Name: [Example restaurant name]
[Example elite review text]"
For each prompt, we randomly selected one model between Curie
and Davinci with equal probability. Also, we randomly sampled the
Temperature value, a hyper-parameter controlling the randomness
of the generated text, from 𝑈∼(0.3, 0.7). For general reference, a
value of 0 generates a deterministic and repetitive text and 1 vice
versa. All the other hyper-parameters were kept as default. Table 1
provides three examples with different sentiments. As a result, the
final dataset of 24,000 reviews, equally balanced between elite and
fake reviews, was split into 80% training and 20% testing for later
use.
3.3
Survey Design for Fake Reviews Detection
We ran a human study in which each respondent was asked to select
the AI-generated review from a set of review pairs. The surveying
strategy consisted of two steps.
Firstly, we sampled and showed 15 review pairs from the training
set to "train" the respondents for the task, with each pair containing
one human-generated review and one AI-generated review. Sec-
ondly, we sampled 40 review pairs from the test set and used those as
survey questions. Train and test set human-written reviews average
about 140 words per review (std 75 words). Here, we picked human-
written reviews in the range 140 ± 40 words away, with reviews
exceeding 140 words categorized as long, and vice-versa, and paired
a comparable length AI-generated review (max 30 words difference).
For the questions, we randomly selected 10 same-restaurant long re-
view pairs (Same-Long, 140>words>180), 10 same-restaurant short
review pairs (Same-Short, 100<words<140), 10 different-restaurant
long review pairs (Different-Long), and 10 different-restaurant short
(Different-Short) review pairs. In relation to the response options,
a third alternative, "Cannot decide. I’m unsure", was included to
enable study participants to indicate their uncertainty instead of
having to resort to a random guess. This additional response choice
aimed to enhance the accuracy and reliability of the survey data
collected by reducing the impact of arbitrary guessing, which may
compromise the validity of the study. All the pairs were randomly
spread across the survey form, and two questions were converted
into attention checks to monitor the respondents’ care.
The survey was then sent to 90 participants through the Prolific
platform, and they were paid about $8.30 per hour. After removing
10 attempts connected to inattentive answers, we counted 80 valid
responses related to 38 questions, totaling 3,040 single-question re-
sponses. We reported the overall average accuracy and the average
accuracy for all four categories. Finally, we conducted a Tukey’s
HSD test to validate whether such category averages were statisti-
cally different.
3.4
Automating Fake Reviews Detection with
AI
We deployed machine learning techniques to carry out the same
task as above. Practically, we fine-tuned a pre-trained GPT-Neo
model [6, 20] to classify fake versus real reviews.
GPT models belong to the family of transformer models, which
have become state-of-the-art in natural language processing and
computer vision. The reason why transformer models are powerful
is that they rely on the attention mechanism [81], allowing the
network to focus mainly on the most relevant parts of the input
sequence. GPT-Neo is designed using EleutherAI’s replication of
the GPT-3 architecture, which currently is OpenAI’s proprietary
software. As such, GPTNeo is a scale-up of the GPT [61] and GPT-2
[62] models.
Practically, we accessed a 125 million parameters pre-trained
version from Huggingface (https://huggingface.co/EleutherAI/gpt-
neo-125M), and fine-tuned it with our generated fake restaurant
reviews dataset. We benchmarked GPT-Neo with other machine
learning models such as Bidirectional-LSTM, Logistic Regression,
Naive Bayes [50], Random Forest [7], XGBoost [12], and GPT-
2. We also benchmarked it to the current open-source OpenAI’s
RoBERTa model for GPT fake text detection [71]. We trained with
5-fold cross-validation on the training set for the machine learning
models and reported the results on the test set. Review texts were
represented with a bag-of-words approach, which tokenizes text
into individual words and then counts the frequency of those words
in each document. While for the deep learning models (BiLSTM,
GPT-2, and GPT-Neo), we extracted another 20% partition from
the training set as validation data since computing 5-fold cross-
validation is computationally expensive. Here, review texts were
tokenized using Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) [68], which is a byte-level
data compression algorithm used to segment words into subword
units by iteratively merging the most frequently occurring pairs
of adjacent bytes. We trained using the AdamW optimizer default
hyper-parameters [46], using a learning rate of 1e-4, decaying it by
a factor of 0.1 every 5 epochs, a batch size of 1, and early-stopping at
10 epochs. For the GPT-Neo, we computed the optimal classification
threshold at each epoch by optimizing Youden’s J statistics in the
validation set [92], calculated as the difference between the true
positives rate and false positives rate. Finally, the best weights and
classification threshold were saved, and evaluation was performed
on the test set. For all the models, we reported the accuracy score,
precision score, recall score, and F1 score.
4

Table 1: Examples of prompt and GPT-3 generated reviews discriminated by different sentiments.
Sentiment
Prompt (Real)
Generated (Fake)
Negative
"Unfortunately I found the soup to be very bland. I’m not
sure if it was a one off but I was very disappointed."
"I was really disappointed with Noona Noodles. The soup
was very bland and I wasn’t sure if it was just a one-off, but
I didn’t enjoy it at all. I wouldn’t recommend it."
Neutral
"Came here for brunch. The shrimp and grits were good so
was the okra and molasses corn bread. The owner, Randy,
came out to greet the tables. The only issue that almost
prevented me from the 4 rating is the long wait for the
food. There were several tables complaining. I suggest they
give the tables biscuits or rolls to address the hunger while
waiting."
"Overall, I had a good experience at Spoonfed NYC. The
shrimp and grits were delicious, as was the okra and mo-
lasses corn bread. The only downside was the long wait for
the food. If they could address the hunger issue, I would
have given this restaurant a 4-star rating."
Positive
"So happy there’s a dim sum spot near my hood! I only
thought Jin Fong only excited in Chinatown. I’m really sur-
prised it has low ratings because every dish I order was
really good and service was great! It’s a little pricey of
what I’m used to of ordering dim sum ($8 a dish of dim
sum). Things I ordered: - Har Gow Shrimp Dumplings-
Crab, Shrimp, Spinach Dumplings- Pork and Chicken Soup
Dumplings- Shrimp Rice Noodles Rolls- Shrimp and Chive
Dumplings"
"If you’re in the mood for some delicious dim sum, Jin Fong
is the place to go! I was really surprised by how good every-
thing I ordered was - the shrimp rice noodles rolls, shrimp
and chive dumplings, and pork and chicken soup dumplings
in particular were all delicious. The only downside is that
the prices are a little higher than I’m used to paying, but
overall it was a great experience."
3.5
Inference on Non-Elite Reviews
With the best GPT-Neo classifier, we performed inference on the
unverified non-elite reviews, determining the probability of each
one being fake. Importantly, reviews posted before 2020 (included)
were dropped, since GPT-3 models were beta-released in 2020. Here,
we hypothesized that GPT-3-based AI crowdturfing campaigns
were implemented in the last two years, given the GPT-3 API’s
easy accessibility and low usage costs. This operation reduced the
inference dataset to 131,266 non-elite reviews. Importantly, Yelp
implements a proprietary algorithm to flag and filter fake reviews
[47]. In this paper, we performed inference on reviews that had
already passed the Yelp filtering system.
Each example review incorporates a review-based variable, i.e.
the review rating (Rating), distributed as a 1 to 5 Likert scale; user-
based variables, i.e. the user’s number of friends (#Friends), the
user’s aggregated number of previously posted reviews (#Reviews),
and the user’s overall number of posted photos (#Photos); and restau-
rant-based variables, i.e. the restaurant’s average rating from all
the reviews (AvgRating), the price level (PriceLevel), i.e. the average
price per person as “$”: under $10, “$$”: $10–$30, “$$$”: $31–$60 and
“$$$$”: over $60, the overall number of restaurant reviews posted
by customers (#RestReviews), the chain status (ChainStatus), com-
puted adopting Zhang & Luo (2022) approach [96], which counts
the number of unique restaurant names in the dataset, and assigns
those appearing more than five times as belonging to a restaurant
chain (e.g. McDonald’s, Starbucks, Burger King, etc.), the number
of customer visits between 2021 and mid-2022 (#Visits), and the
normalized number of visits (NormVisits), multiplied by 1,000 for
easier readability. A summary statistics is provided in Table 2.
Afterward, classification was performed with a sensitivity analy-
sis approach at the [.5, .6, .7, .8, .9, .99 and J] classification thresholds.
For each threshold, we separated predicted fake versus non-fake
Table 2: Summary statistics of non-elite reviews related vari-
ables.
Name
Category
Mean
Std
Rating
Review
3.98
1.44
#Friends
User
70.71
174.22
#Reviews
User
43.25
129.56
#Photos
User
63.90
722.89
AvgRating
Restaurant
3.96
0.49
PriceLevel
Restaurant
2.23
0.67
#RestReviews
Restaurant
747.47
1045.94
#Visits
Restaurant
2993.03
5835.29
NormVisits
Restaurant
0.19
0.37
ChainStatus
Restaurant
0.14
0.35
reviews, and performed ANOVA for each aforementioned variable
to inspect differences across the two predicted categories. This
methodology was adopted because the labels about whether non-
elite reviews were AI-generated were not available. Thus, different
thresholds were tested to examine the sensitivity and robustness of
predictions.
3.6
Writing Style: Explaining the Predictions
In our context, writing style refers to how a textual review is con-
structed by the writer, sentence-by-sentence, and word-by-word.
Although it is hard to distinguish at first impact, we believe that
humans and AI have different writing styles, with the latter being
more repetitive, more predictable, and less sophisticated than the
former.
We considered three classes of metrics to evaluate the writing
style of each non-elite review: perplexity-based, readability-based,
5

and sentiment-based metrics. Perplexity-based metrics include Per-
plexity (PPL) and Textual Coherence (TC).
𝑃𝑃𝐿(𝑋) = exp
"
−1
𝑡
𝑡∑︁
1
log𝑝(𝑥𝑖|𝑥<𝑖)
#
(1)
As in Equation 1, PPL is defined as the exponential average
negative log-likelihood of a sequence of words 𝑤𝑖,𝑤𝑖+1 . . .𝑤𝑖+𝑡.
In simple terms, it measures the conditional probability that each
word follows its preceding one. As of 2022, PPL is one of the most
widely adopted metrics to evaluate the accuracy of language models.
Generally, a low PPL score implies better grammar text correctness
and cohesion.
Then, by breaking a review into a sequence of sentences, we in-
troduce the concept of Textual Coherence (TC). TC is defined as the
presence of semantic relations among sentences. In simple words,
given a corpus containing a set of sentences that when viewed inde-
pendently convey a valid meaning, if by reading them sequentially
no meaning is conveyed, then the corpus is not coherent. To mea-
sure TC, we deployed the Zero-Shot Shuffle Test [38, 85]. Namely,
we split each review into single sentences and generated all the
possible sentence permutations. We scored each permutation with
the PPL as in Equation 1 and subtracted the original perplexity
score, obtaining a per-review set of perplexity changes, which we
averaged to compute TC. It is important to highlight that some
reviews contained a large number of sentences, leading to high
computational costs in generating permutations. Mathematically,
given a set of 𝑛sentences (population), and a subset of 𝑟sentences
to be chosen from 𝑛, it is possible to generate all the permutations
without repetition 𝑃(𝑛,𝑟) =
𝑛!
(𝑛−𝑟)!. In our problem, 𝑛= 𝑟, meaning
that 𝑃(𝑛,𝑟) = 𝑛!, which incurs an expensive computational cost
𝑂(𝑛!). To mitigate that, we sampled 𝑠sentences from each review
such that 𝑠= 𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑛, 5). We chose 5 as a maximum threshold be-
cause such value represents the median number of sentences per
review, and because 5! per-review permutations are still compu-
tationally feasible to be processed. To calculate both PPL and TC,
we adopted a general purpose pre-trained 125 million parameters
GPT-Neo.
As for readability-based metrics instead, we considered the fol-
lowing metrics: Automated Readability Index (ARI) [69], Number of
Difficult Words (#DW), and Readability Time (RTime). ARI is one of
the most widely adopted readability indices to evaluate the read-
ability of a given text. Also, it has already been adopted in other
studies evaluating the readability of online reviews (e.g. [22, 29]).
𝐴𝑅𝐼= 4.71 #𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑠
#𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑠+ 0.5 #𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑠
#𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑠−21.43
(2)
As in Equation 2, ARI decomposes the text into basic structural
elements such as the number of characters (#Chars), number of
words (#Words), and number of sentences (#Sentences). Unlike other
readability indices, the main advantage of ARI is that it relies on
the number of characters per word and not on the number of syl-
lables per word, therefore being more accurate to calculate for a
computer. Also, the interpretation of ARI is straightforward, as its
output produces an approximated representation of the US-grade
education level needed to understand the text. For example, an ARI
of 9.2 indicates that a 9th-grade student can understand the text.
Table 3: Tukey-HSD test results across categories. In brack-
ets the category unweighted by abstention rate accuracy av-
erages in percentage. "Different" stands for different restau-
rants, and "Same" vice versa. "Long" stands for a long review,
and "Short" vice versa. *p<.05, **p<.01, ***p<.001.
Category 1
Category 2
MeanDiff
Different-Long (50.76)
Different-Short (55.11)
4.35
Different-Long (50.76)
Same-Long (61.39)
10.63*
Different-Long (50.76)
Same-Short (61.93)
11.17**
Different-Short (55.11)
Same-Long (61.39)
6.28
Different-Short (55.11)
Same-Short (61.93)
6.82
Same-Long (61.39)
Same-Short (61.93)
0.54
Simply put, the higher the ARI score, the higher the difficulty in
text comprehension for an average interlocutor. Next, #DW is the
count of difficult words present in a text. By looking at the Dale-
Chall Word List [14], which contains approximately 3,000 familiar
words known by an average 5th-grade student, if a word is not
present in the list, then it is labeled as difficult. Then, RTime was
computed by following [16], who found that each text character
needs an estimated average of 14.69 milliseconds to be digested by
the reader. Finally, the only sentiment-based metric is the SiEBERT
Sentiment score [23]. SiEBERT is based on a RoBERTa architecture
and fine-tuned on 15 different datasets. Its output ranges from -1
(negative) to +1 (positive).
To sum up, we scored each review with the above-mentioned
perplexity-based, readability-based, and sentiment-based metrics.
Afterward, for each metric, we performed ANOVA to inspect differ-
ences across the predicted fake versus real reviews with the same
methodology mentioned in Section 3.5.
4
RESULTS
4.1
Human Evaluations versus Model
Evaluations
Surveyed people from the general public only attained an accuracy
score of 57.13% (std 13.57%), meaning that humans are only 7.13%
better than random guessing (=50%). In addition, we recorded an
abstention rate (i.e. selecting the "Cannot Decide. I’m unsure option")
of 11.15% (std 12.66%). In Table 3, we report the Tukey-HSD results
across the different categories. Here, we did not discover significant
differences across categories, except for (1) Different-Long versus
Same-Long (10.63, p<.05), and (2) Different-Long versus Same-Short
(11.17, p<.01) pairs. Apparently, for long reviews, humans are more
accurate in distinguishing fake content when the review is asso-
ciated with the same restaurant. However, with these results, we
concluded that humans are not generally capable of distinguishing
real versus fake content. Conversely, machine learning algorithms
attained significantly better performance than human evaluators.
In Table 4 we provide the classification report of the classifiers.
We observed that the current OpenAI’s fake text detector bench-
mark improved human evaluators’ accuracy by 19.65%, meaning
that machines are more suitable for performing the task. This claim
6

Table 4: Models classification report on test set ranked by
F1-score.
Model
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1-score
OpenAI
76.78
84.87
64.98
73.60
NB
83.48
93.62
71.72
81.22
RF
82.39
84.61
79.01
81.72
XGB
83.18
86.59
78.38
82.28
LR
85.07
87.00
82.34
84.61
BiLSTM
93.71
93.09
93.09
93.09
GPT-2
94.63
94.57
94.65
94.61
GPTNeo
95.21
94.74
95.70
95.22
GPTNeo@J
95.51
95.80
95.15
95.48
was strengthened by looking at the performance of standard ma-
chine learning algorithms. In particular, LR ranked as the top per-
former among those with an accuracy score and F1-score of 85.07%
and 84.61%, respectively. As for deep learning models, GPT-Neo
models ranked as top performers. Specifically, the GPT-Neo max-
imizing accuracy after calculating the Youden’s-J statistics as the
optimal classification threshold in the validation set (GPT-Neo@J)
achieves the best performance. Convergence occurred at the 2nd
epoch, with optimal 𝐽∗=.5708. Overall, GPT-Neo@J significantly
outperforms human evaluators and OpenAI’s benchmark by 38.38%
and 18.73%, respectively. With this finding, we applied the opti-
mized GPT-Neo@J model for inference on the unverified non-elite
reviews.
4.2
ANOVA Results
Unless differently specified, ANOVA results are discussed at the .05
significance level and at the optimized classification threshold 𝐽∗
found in Section 4.1. In Table 5, we provide a per-variable summary.
Out of a total of 131,266 non-elite reviews posted from 2021
onwards, 8.48% were predicted as fraudulent. As demonstrated in
Figure 2, this percentage decreases as the threshold 𝑡is lowered. For
instance, at a threshold of 𝑡=.99, only .10% of reviews were detected
as AI-generated.
4.2.1
Review-based and User-based. For the review Rating,
and the users’ #Reviews, #Friends and #Photos all differences across
predicted fake AI-generated and predicted real reviews were sta-
tistically significant. Here, reviews classified as fake were given a
higher average star Rating (+.43, 𝑝<.001). As for user-based vari-
ables, reviews classified as fake were posted by users with a lower
average number of #Friends (-5.59, 𝑝<.01), a lower average number
of previously posted #Reviews (-11.37, 𝑝<.001), and a lower average
number of previously posted #Photos (-34.32, 𝑝<.001). In Figure
3, we show a sensitivity analysis considering other thresholds 𝑡
of classification. Remarkably, when the threshold 𝑡is set to .99,
both Rating and #Reviews exhibited greater statistically significant
differences, with disparities of +.66 (𝑝< .001) and -24.06 (𝑝< .05), re-
spectively. In contrast, the variables #Friends and #Photos no longer
demonstrated statistical significance at this threshold.
4.2.2
Restaurant-based. We observed that predicted fake re-
views were associated with restaurants with a higher AvgRating
Figure 2: Percentage of predicted fake reviews at each
threshold. In blue, highlighted the 𝐽∗=.5708 optimal thresh-
old.
Table 5: Summary of ANOVA results at 𝐽∗=.5708 classifica-
tion threshold for the average predicted human (real) and
AI (fake). *p<.05, **p<.01, ***p<.001.
Name
Category
Human
AI
F-statistic
Rating
Review
3.94
4.37
914.91***
#Friends
User
71.19
65.60
10.45**
#Reviews
User
44.21
32.84
78.46***
#Photos
User
66.81
32.49
22.96***
AvgRating
Restaurant
3.97
4.00
41.84***
PriceLevel
Restaurant
2.24
2.22
3.52
#RestReviews
Restaurant
743.68
788.39
18.61***
#Visits
Restaurant
3004
2866
5.22*
NormVisits
Restaurant
0.19
0.18
5.18*
ChainStatus
Restaurant
0.14
0.14
0.04
Perplexity
Writing
78.70
83.38
14.01***
Coherence
Writing
25.31
21.20
3.33
ARI
Writing
7.05
6.82
13.35***
#DW
Writing
10.70
6.76
1847.82***
RTime
Writing
5.21
2.87
2532.22***
Sentiment
Writing
0.47
0.71
779.17***
(+.03, 𝑝<.001). However, given the minimal difference, we acknowl-
edge the modest practical implications that such a result may bring
about. Then, we documented statistical significance concerning #Re-
stReviews. Here, predicted fake reviews were connected to restau-
rants that displayed a greater average number of reviews avail-
able (+44.71, 𝑝<.001). The opposite behavior was observed for the
average #Visits, in which predicted fake reviews were linked to
restaurants that received fewer customer visits from 2021 to mid-
2022 (-138, 𝑝<.05). This result was strengthened by NormVisits (-.01,
𝑝<.05). Finally, no significant differences were noticed for the Chain-
Status and the PriceLevel (𝑝>.05). In Figure 4, we show a sensitivity
analysis considering other thresholds 𝑡of classification.
4.2.3
Writing Style. AI-generated fake reviews showed a higher
average Perplexity (+4.68, 𝑝<.001). However, Perplexity of predicted
7

Figure 3: Sensitivity analysis of review-based and user-based
variables. In blue, highlighted the 𝐽∗=.5708 optimal thresh-
old value. Error bars are the confidence intervals at the .05
significance level.
AI-generated fake reviews also displayed a statistically significant
downtrend when increasing the classification threshold 𝑡(𝑝<.05),
eventually scoring lower than for predicted human-generated re-
views from 𝑡>.7. Instead, when considering Textual Coherence, i.e.
defined as the change in perplexity between sentence-shuffled doc-
uments, no statistical significance was observed (𝑝>.05). Figure 5
shows the sensitivity analysis.
As for readability-based metrics, predicted AI-generated fake
reviews were discovered to be more readable and less difficult to
comprehend compared to the human-generated ones. Both aver-
age ARI and average #DW scored lower for AI-generated content,
(-.23, 𝑝<.001) and (-3.94, 𝑝<.001), meaning that such content can
be understood by a wider audience. Also, predicted AI-generated
fake reviews were faster to read by 2.34 seconds (𝑝<.001). Lastly,
for Sentiment, we observed that predicted AI-generated reviews
have a more positive tone (+.24, 𝑝<.001). Here, predicted human
text averaged to a medium positive polarity close to .5 at each 𝑡;
while, predicted AI-generated text displayed a statistically signifi-
cant positive trend, ending up at .87 at 𝑡=.99 (𝑝<.001).
5
DISCUSSION
Aligned with findings from prior studies in fake reviews identifica-
tion [58, 65, 74], we described how human evaluators systematically
fail at detecting GPT-3 AI-generated content (AIGC) in the domain
of restaurant reviews. On the contrary, machine learning models
significantly achieve superior performance (+38.38% accuracy). We
have also shown that optimizing Youden’s J statistic in the vali-
dation set can further improve prediction accuracy (+.3%). Such
Figure 4: Sensitivity analysis of restaurant-based variables.
In blue, highlighted the 𝐽∗=.5708 optimal threshold value.
Error bars are the confidence intervals at the .05 significance
level.
disparity in performance between humans and machines could
be possibly attributed to human cognitive limitations at detecting
patterns from large-scale unstructured data [35]. Prior studies that
leveraged machine learning techniques reported filtering out user-
generated fake reviews at estimated rates around 15% [39, 48, 75].
In our sample of customer reviews that already passed the filtering
system of social media (Yelp), we further documented that up to
8.48% of them were fake reviews generated by AI. We then explored
how fake AI-generated reviews differentiate from human-generated
reviews across several associated dimensions. In Table 6, we sum-
marize extant literature findings on user-generated fake reviews
compared to our findings on AI-generated fake reviews. Firstly,
we observed that predicted AI-fake reviews score a higher average
Rating compared to the human-generated ones (+.43, 𝑝<.001). This
finding is congruent with conclusions from [48], who documented
that fake reviews have a bimodal distribution with spikes at 1 and
5 stars, and from [39], who singled out 56% of positive reviews out
of 15,000 hotel fake reviews on Yelp. Extant literature may provide
8

Figure 5: Sensitivity analysis of writing-style variables. In
blue, highlighted the 𝐽∗=.5708 optimal threshold value. Er-
ror bars are the confidence intervals at the .05 significance
level.
a rationale for our result, as they suggest that economic agents
seeking to bolster or restore their reputation may be more likely to
engage in the self-promotion of falsely positive reviews [48, 59, 86],
because, for example, a one-star increase in the average Yelp rating
has been documented to be associated with 5-9% revenue growth
[47]. Secondly, consistent with prior observations from [5, 48], users
that post more predicted fake AI-generated reviews have less estab-
lished Yelp reputations as compared to those that allegedly post real
content: fewer previously posted #Reviews (-11.37, 𝑝<.001), fewer
#Friends (-5.59, 𝑝<.01), and fewer previously posted #Photos (-34.32,
𝑝<.001). Such diminished engagement levels exhibited by users
that post more predicted fake AI-generated reviews might indicate
an inclination toward spamming activities. It might be logical to
presume that fraudsters engaging in spamming behavior would
demonstrate lower levels of activity on a given platform. This might
be due to their employment of rotating accounts to disseminate
fabricated content, which might explain their lack of interest in
Table 6: Summary of the findings from extant literature re-
lated to UGC fake reviews extend by this research to the
realm of AIGC fake reviews.
Variable
Study UGC Prior Results
AIGC Results (ours)
Rating
[48]
Bimodal
distribu-
tion. Spikes at 1
star and 5 stars.
Fake more positive.
Rating
[39]
Fake more positive.
Fake more positive.
#Friends
[5]
Fake fewer friends.
Fake fewer friends.
#Friends
[48]
Fake fewer friends.
Fake fewer friends.
#Photos
[5]
Fake fewer photos.
Fake fewer photos.
#Reviews
[5]
Fake fewer reviews.
Fake fewer reviews.
#Reviews
[48]
Fake fewer reviews.
Fake fewer reviews.
ChainStatus
[48]
Chain display less
fake content.
No statistical differ-
ence.
#RestReviews [48]
Stronger incentives
to post fake reviews
when few reviews
displayed.
Fake more reviews.
ARI
[22]
Fake less complex.
Fake less complex.
ARI
[91]
Fake more complex.
Fake less complex.
Sentiment
[91]
Fake more positive.
Fake more positive.
Sentiment
[4]
Fake more positive.
Fake more positive.
Sentiment
[44]
Fake more polar-
ized.
Fake more positive.
cultivating reliable and trustworthy reputations within the Yelp
community. At the extreme of this phenomenon, such a pattern
is exacerbated by the presence of singleton-review spammers, who
generated a multitude of accounts that end up publishing a single
review per account as a consequence of their fraudulent activity
[66].
Thirdly, regarding restaurant-based variables, our study found
no significant impact of fake AI-generated reviews on the overall
average restaurant rating, price level, and chain status. Specifically,
the very marginal difference of +.03 (𝑝<.001) in AvgRating lacks
practical relevance since humans are not affected by such a small
difference. Moreover, no difference in AI-generated fake reviews
from either PriceLevel or ChainStatus showed any statistical signifi-
cance. However, it is worth pointing out that our findings are in
contrast with prior research concerning chain restaurants, as [48]
found that they are less likely to display fake content to protect
their brand reputation. Next, predicted AI-generated fake reviews
tend to be associated with restaurants displaying more reviews on
their Yelp web pages (#RestReviews, +44.71, 𝑝<.001). Yet, extant liter-
ature posited that restaurants have a stronger incentive to post fake
reviews when few reviews are available [48], because the marginal
benefit of each additional review is higher since Yelp focuses on
the average rating as an indicator of customer satisfaction to be
reported in restaurant web pages.
Interestingly, by leveraging the power of the SafeGraph data,
which reports the estimated per-restaurant customer visits (#Visits),
we concluded that restaurants that displayed more AI-generated
fake reviews totaled fewer customer visits (-138, 𝑝<.05). To the best
9

of our knowledge, this study represents the first analysis leverag-
ing real users’ visits to describe how fake reviews correlate with
customer visits in the hospitality sector. Also, this finding raises
novel research questions that aim to investigate the influence of
fabricated reviews on business performance. This research direc-
tion is motivated by the need to gain a deeper understanding of
the potential effects of fake reviews on consumer behavior, which
can inform business strategies and policies to promote fairness and
transparency in online marketplaces.
Finally, we inspected the writing style of the two predicted re-
view categories. As for perplexity-based metrics, our results sug-
gest that perplexity exhibits a downtrend pattern when applied
to sequential thresholds of classification 𝑡. Specifically, our find-
ings indicated that at 𝑡<.7, the mean Perplexity of predicted fake
AI-generated reviews was higher than for human-generated text
(𝑝<.01), whereas it was lower at 𝑡>.7 (𝑝<.05). Additionally, Textual
Coherence was not found to be statistically significant at any thresh-
old. The pattern of Perplexity may be explained by analyzing how
large language models (LLM) are developed and generate text. LLM
(including ChatGPT) are trained by predicting the next most likely
token in a sequence of words, minimizing textual perplexity, and
are more likely to output common words instead of rare words
[26]. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that AI-generated texts have
lower perplexity in comparison to human-generated ones, meaning
that LLM demonstrate reduced uncertainty in generating text. In
other words, perplexity may reflect the likelihood of a text being
machine-generated, with lower values indicating a higher proba-
bility of machine generation. In connection with this, our study
reports a statistically significant downward trend in Perplexity for
AI-generated text across all thresholds 𝑡(see Figure 5). Here, higher
values of 𝑡can be interpreted as a higher level of confidence in clas-
sifying text as AI-generated. Therefore, we hypothesize that as our
confidence in classification increases, the likelihood of misclassify-
ing an AI-generated text decreases, thus leading to lower perplexity.
Our findings are consistent with this hypothesis. In practical terms,
AI-generated reviews exhibit greater grammatical correctness and
predictability, yet they may lack word originality and creativity, as
well as potentially be repetitive.
Next, as for readability-based, we showed that AI-generated
reviews bear a higher degree of comprehension, necessitating a
lower educational grade to be understood, as measured by ARI (-
.23, 𝑝<.001) and #DW (-3.94, 𝑝<.001). These findings are congruent
with [22], but different from [91]. Specifically, predicted human-
generated reviews and AI-generated reviews score ARI values of
7.05 and 6.82, respectively, meaning that they can be understood
by average 7th and 6th-grade US students, respectively. According
to [1], written content that is easily comprehensible can reduce the
cognitive load on readers’ information processing capabilities. As a
result, such content may attract a larger readership and positively
affect the perceived helpfulness of reviews. Based on this premise
and on our results, we hypothesize that AI-generated fake reviews
may capture readers’ attention more effectively than authentic
human-written reviews. Consequently, we warn that the prevalence
of fake reviews may bias consumers’ perceptions and intentions to
visit a restaurant that has published more fake content relative to
one that has not.
As for sentiment, aligned with [4, 44, 91], AI-generated fake
reviews presented a more positive tone (Sentiment, +.24, 𝑝<.001).
Here, review spammers may be deliberately employed to alter cus-
tomers’ perceptions by using exaggerated language that translates
into more polarized sentiment polarities [59], because spammers
are presumably not able to express true sentiment when writing
[44]. Based on our research findings, we conjecture that a more
positive tone may be a signal of self-promoting activities. This is
congruent with our previous result that AI-generated fake reviews
tend to have higher average ratings (+.43, 𝑝<.001), as both variables
are closely intertwined in the effect they measure.
This study is not without limitations. Firstly, we restricted the
analysis to the city of New York to avoid sampling biases. How-
ever, we cannot conclude whether the results can be generalized
to other areas. Secondly, we relied on the SafeGraph dataset to
collect restaurant reviews. Yet, SafeGraph does not disclose the ex-
act data collection methodology for selecting example restaurants,
leaving us with uncertainty about the representativeness of the
dataset. Thirdly, we only relied on 2021 and 2022 inferential data,
because GPT-3 models were proprietarily beta-released in mid-2020
[8]. However, years 2021 and early 2022 were still affected by the
COVID-19 pandemic, thus weakening our results as compared to
ordinary years, as local lockdowns may have been imposed by
New York authorities, potentially changing customers’ behavior.
It may be reasonable to point out that results about the number
of customers’ visits may be subjected to changes during ordinary
times. Fourthly, we highlight that when filtering out reviews at
𝑡=.99 only about 130 AI-generated fake reviews were singled out.
This data limitation reduced statistical power in ANOVA. Lastly
and importantly, we do not intend to provide any causal interpreta-
tion to the results found, thus limiting us in drawing cause-effect
conclusions. This research should be referenced to describe pat-
terns across the variables considered and their relationship with
predicted fake AI-generated and genuine reviews.
6
CONCLUSION
Disseminating fake reviews with LLMs such as ChatGPT has be-
come easier and cheaper than ever. Such accessibility may amplify
the proliferation of "AI crowdturfing" campaigns aimed at distort-
ing user experiences on social media. This study proves that AI-
generated fake reviews are becoming more sophisticated and can
easily deceive readers. Therefore, it is imperative for policymakers
to develop regulations that require online review platforms to imple-
ment tools and processes to detect and remove fake reviews. This
research also underscores the need for online review platforms
to invest in better detection tools for AI-generated text. As the
technology used to generate fake reviews becomes more advanced,
review platforms must keep pace with technological advancements
to ensure they can detect and remove such content effectively. To
combat this issue, we implemented AI-based detection and descrip-
tion of fake AI-generated content across review-based, user-based,
restaurant-based, and writing-based variables, showing that fake
reviews tend to have a higher rating, that users posting more AI-
generated content have less established Yelp reputations, and that
such AI-generated content is easier to understand as compared
to the human-generated one. Notably, without providing causal
10

claims, we also described how restaurants displaying more fake
content are subjected to fewer customer visits. Up to now, no study
has investigated how fake reviews correlate with customer visits.
Thus, we intend to open novel research questions in this direction.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded by Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnolo-
gia (UID/ECO/00124/2019, UIDB/00124/2020 and Social Sciences
DataLab, PINFRA/22209/2016), POR Lisboa and POR Norte (So-
cial Sciences DataLab, PINFRA/22209/2016), and by Oracle via the
Oracle for Research Grant providing the hardware infrastructure.
REFERENCES
[1] Arpita Agnihotri and Saurabh Bhattacharya. 2016. Online review helpfulness:
Role of qualitative factors. Psychology & Marketing 33, 11 (2016), 1006–1017.
[2] Eric T Anderson and Duncan I Simester. 2014. Reviews without a purchase:
Low ratings, loyal customers, and deception. Journal of Marketing Research 51,
3 (2014), 249–269.
[3] Snehasish Banerjee and Alton Y.K. Chua. 2014. Applauses in Hotel Reviews:
Genuine or Deceptive?. In Proceedings of 2014 Science and Information Conference.
IEEE, London, UK, 938–942.
[4] Snehasish Banerjee and Alton YK Chua. 2014. A theoretical framework to
identify authentic online reviews. Online Information Review 38, 5 (2014), 634–
649.
[5] Rodrigo Barbado, Oscar Araque, and Carlos A Iglesias. 2019. A framework
for fake review detection in online consumer electronics retailers. Information
Processing & Management 56, 4 (2019), 1234–1244.
[6] Sid Black, Gao Leo, Phil Wang, Connor Leahy, and Stella Biderman. 2021. GPT-
Neo: Large Scale Autoregressive Language Modeling with Mesh-Tensorflow. https:
//doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5297715
[7] Leo Breiman. 2001. Random Forests. Machine Learning 45, 1 (2001), 5–32.
[8] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan,
Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan,
Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris
Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess,
Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
and Dario Amodei. 2020. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell,
M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (Eds.), Vol. 33. Curran Associates, Inc., 1877–1901.
[9] Qing Cao, Wenjing Duan, and Qiwei Gan. 2011. Exploring determinants of
voting for the “helpfulness” of online user reviews: A text mining approach.
Decision Support Systems 50, 2 (2011), 511–521.
[10] Ting Chang, Yingjie Hu, Dane Taylor, and Brian M. Quigley. 2022. The role
of alcohol outlet visits derived from mobile phone location data in enhancing
domestic violence prediction at the neighborhood level. Health & Place 73 (2022),
102736.
[11] Ben Charoenwong, Alan Kwan, and Vesa Pursiainen. 2020. Social connections
with COVID-19–affected areas increase compliance with mobility restrictions.
Science Advances 6, 47 (2020), eabc3054.
[12] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. 2016. XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting
System. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (San Francisco, California, USA) (KDD
’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 785–794.
[13] Michael Crawford, M. Taghi Khoshgoftaar, D. Joseph Prusa, N. Aaron Richter,
and Hamzah Al Najada. 2015. Survey of review spam detection using machine
learning techniques. Journal of Big Data 2, 23 (2015).
[14] Edgar Dale and Jeanne S Chall. 1948. A formula for predicting readability:
Instructions. Educational research bulletin (1948), 37–54.
[15] David C DeAndrea, Brandon Van Der Heide, Megan A Vendemia, and Mao H
Vang. 2018. How people evaluate online reviews. Communication Research 45,
5 (2018), 719–736.
[16] Vera Demberg and Frank Keller. 2008. Data from eye-tracking corpora as
evidence for theories of syntactic processing complexity. Cognition 109, 2 (2008),
193–210.
[17] Wenjing Duan, Bin Gu, and Andrew B. Whinston. 2008. Do online reviews
matter? — An empirical investigation of panel data. Decision Support Systems
45, 4 (2008), 1007–1016.
[18] Raffaele Filieri, Salma Alguezaui, and Fraser McLeay. 2015. Why do travelers
trust TripAdvisor? Antecedents of trust towards consumer-generated media
and its influence on recommendation adoption and word of mouth. Tourism
management 51 (2015), 174–185.
[19] Joshua Fogel and Samson Zachariah. 2017. Intentions to use the yelp review
website and purchase behavior after reading reviews. Journal of theoretical and
applied electronic commerce research 12, 1 (2017), 53–67.
[20] Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles
Foster, Jason Phang, Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, et al. 2020. The
Pile: An 800GB Dataset of Diverse Text for Language Modeling. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2101.00027 (2020).
[21] Stefan Gössling, C Michael Hall, and Ann-Christin Andersson. 2018. The man-
ager’s dilemma: a conceptualization of online review manipulation strategies.
Current Issues in Tourism 21, 5 (2018), 484–503.
[22] Christopher Glenn Harris. 2012. Detecting deceptive opinion spam using human
computation. In Workshops at the Twenty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence.
[23] Jochen Hartmann, Mark Heitmann, Christian Siebert, and Christina Schamp.
2022. More than a feeling: Accuracy and Application of Sentiment Analysis.
International Journal of Research in Marketing (2022).
[24] Mohamad Hazim, Nor Badrul Anuar, Mohd Faizal Ab Razak, and Nor Aniza
Abdullah. 2018. Detecting opinion spams through supervised boosting approach.
PloS one 13, 6 (2018), e0198884.
[25] Haoyu He, Hengfang Deng, Qi Wang, and Jianxi Gao. 2022. Percolation of
temporal hierarchical mobility networks during COVID-19. Philosophical Trans-
actions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences
380, 2214 (2022), 20210116.
[26] Melissa Heikkilä. 2022. How to spot AI-generated text. Retrieved April 7, 2023
from https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/12/19/1065596/how-to-spot-ai-
generated-text/
[27] Brian Heredia, Taghi M Khoshgoftaar, Joseph D Prusa, and Michael Crawford.
2017. Improving detection of untrustworthy online reviews using ensemble
learners combined with feature selection. Social Network Analysis and Mining 7
(2017), 1–18.
[28] Nan Hu, Indranil Bose, Yunjun Gao, and Ling Liu. 2011. Manipulation in digital
word-of-mouth: A reality check for book reviews. Decision Support Systems 50,
3 (2011), 627–635.
[29] Nan Hu, Indranil Bose, Noi Sian Koh, and Ling Liu. 2012. Manipulation of online
reviews: An analysis of ratings, readability, and sentiments. Decision Support
Systems 52, 3 (2012), 674–684.
[30] Nan Hu, Ling Liu, and Jie Jennifer Zhang. 2008. Do online reviews affect product
sales? The role of reviewer characteristics and temporal effects. Information
Technology and Management 9 (2008), 201–214.
[31] Yingjie Hu, Brian M. Quigley, and Dane Taylor. 2021. Human mobility data
and machine learning reveal geographic differences in alcohol sales and alcohol
outlet visits across U.S. states during COVID-19. PLOS ONE 16, 12 (12 2021),
1–27.
[32] Kate Mathews Hunt. 2015. Gaming the system: Fake online reviews v. consumer
law. Computer law & security review 31, 1 (2015), 3–25.
[33] Athirai A. Irissappane, Hanfei Yu, Yankun Shen, Anubha Agrawal, and Gray Stan-
ton. 2020. Leveraging GPT-2 for Classifying Spam Reviews with Limited Labeled
Data via Adversarial Training. CoRR abs/2012.13400 (2020). arXiv:2012.13400
[34] Nitin Jindal and Bing Liu. 2008. Opinion Spam and Analysis. In Proceedings of
the 2008 International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (Palo Alto,
California, USA) (WSDM ’08). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 219–230.
[35] Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky. 1972. Subjective probability: A judgment
of representativeness. Cognitive psychology 3, 3 (1972), 430–454.
[36] Faisal Khurshid, Yan Zhu, Zhuang Xu, Mushtaq Ahmad, and Muqeet Ahmad.
2019. Enactment of ensemble learning for review spam detection on selected
features. International Journal of Computational Intelligence Systems 12, 1 (2019),
387–394.
[37] Nikos Korfiatis, Daniel Rodriguez, and M. Sicilia. 2008. The Impact of Readability
on the Usefulness of Online Product Reviews: A Case Study on an Online
Bookstore. 423–432.
[38] Philippe Laban, Luke Dai, Lucas Bandarkar, and Marti A. Hearst. 2021. Can
Transformer Models Measure Coherence In Text: Re-Thinking the Shuffle Test.
In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (Volume 2: Short Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics,
Online, 1058–1064.
[39] Theodoros Lappas, Gaurav Sabnis, and Georgios Valkanas. 2016. The impact
of fake reviews on online visibility: A vulnerability assessment of the hotel
industry. Information Systems Research 27, 4 (2016), 940–961.
[40] Shun-Yang Lee, Liangfei Qiu, and Andrew Whinston. 2018. Sentiment manipula-
tion in online platforms: An analysis of movie tweets. Production and Operations
Management 27, 3 (2018), 393–416.
[41] Fangtao Huang Li, Minlie Huang, Yi Yang, and Xiaoyan Zhu. 2011. Learning to
identify review spam. In Twenty-second international joint conference on artificial
intelligence.
[42] Mengxiang Li, Liqiang Huang, Chuan-Hoo Tan, and Kwok-Kee Wei. 2013. Help-
fulness of online product reviews as seen by consumers: Source and content
11

features. International Journal of Electronic Commerce 17, 4 (2013), 101–136.
[43] Veronica Liljander, Johanna Gummerus, and Magnus Söderlund. 2015. Young
consumers’ responses to suspected covert and overt blog marketing. Internet
Research (2015).
[44] Yuanchao Liu and Bo Pang. 2018. A unified framework for detecting author
spamicity by modeling review deviation. Expert Systems with Applications 112
(2018), 148–155.
[45] Yuanchao Liu, Bo Pang, and Xiaolong Wang. 2019. Opinion spam detection by
incorporating multimodal embedded representation into a probabilistic review
graph. Neurocomputing 366 (2019), 276–283.
[46] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. 2017. Fixing Weight Decay Regularization in
Adam. (2017). arXiv:1711.05101
[47] Michael Luca. 2016. Reviews, reputation, and revenue: The case of Yelp. com.
Com (March 15, 2016). Harvard Business School NOM Unit Working Paper 12-016
(2016).
[48] Michael Luca and Georgios Zervas. 2016. Fake It Till You Make It: Reputation,
Competition, and Yelp Review Fraud. Management Science 62, 12 (2016), 3412–
3427.
[49] Yoon Jin Ma and Hyun-Hwa Lee. 2014. Consumer responses toward online
review manipulation. Journal of Research in Interactive Marketing 8, 3 (2014),
224–244.
[50] Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hinrich Schütze. 2008. In-
troduction to Information Retrieval. Cambridge University Press, USA.
[51] Jonathan Marciano. 2021. Fake online reviews cost $152 billion a year. Here’s
how e-commerce sites can stop them. World Economic Forum.
Retrieved
January 7, 2023 from https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2021/08/fake-online-
reviews-are-a-152-billion-problem-heres-how-to-silence-them/
[52] Dina Mayzlin, Yaniv Dover, and Judith Chevalier. 2014. Promotional reviews:
An empirical investigation of online review manipulation. American Economic
Review 104, 8 (2014), 2421–2455.
[53] Megan McCluskey. 2022. Inside the War on Fake Consumer Reviews. Time. Re-
trieved January 7, 2023 from https://time.com/6192933/fake-reviews-regulation/
[54] Andreas Munzel. 2016. Assisting consumers in detecting fake reviews: The
role of identity information disclosure and consensus. Journal of Retailing and
Consumer Services 32 (2016), 96–108.
[55] OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv:2303.08774 [cs.CL]
[56] Myle Ott, Claire Cardie, and Jeff Hancock. 2012. Estimating the Prevalence of
Deception in Online Review Communities. In Proceedings of the 21st International
Conference on World Wide Web (Lyon, France) (WWW ’12). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 201–210.
[57] Myle Ott, Claire Cardie, and Jeffrey T Hancock. 2013. Negative deceptive opinion
spam. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference of the north american chapter of the
association for computational linguistics: human language technologies. 497–501.
[58] Myle Ott, Yejin Choi, Claire Cardie, and Jeffrey T. Hancock. 2011. Finding
Deceptive Opinion Spam by Any Stretch of the Imagination. In Proceedings of
the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies. Association for Computational Linguistics, Portland,
Oregon, USA, 309–319.
[59] Himangshu Paul and Alexander Nikolaev. 2021. Fake Review Detection on
Online E-Commerce Platforms: A Systematic Literature Review. Data Mining
and Knowledge Discovery 35, 5 (2021), 1830–1881.
[60] Daria Plotkina, Andreas Munzel, and Jessie Pallud. 2020.
Illusions of
truth—Experimental insights into human and algorithmic detections of fake
online reviews. Journal of Business Research 109 (2020), 511–523.
[61] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. 2018.
Improving language understanding by generative pre-training. (2018).
[62] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya
Sutskever, et al. 2019. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners.
OpenAI blog 1, 8 (2019), 9.
[63] Shebuti Rayana and Leman Akoglu. 2015. Collective Opinion Spam Detec-
tion: Bridging Review Networks and Metadata. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD
’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 985–994.
[64] Yafeng Ren and Donghong Ji. 2017. Neural networks for deceptive opinion
spam detection: An empirical study. Information Sciences 385 (2017), 213–224.
[65] Joni Salminen, Chandrashekhar Kandpal, Ahmed Mohamed Kamel, Soon-gyo
Jung, and Bernard J Jansen. 2022. Creating and detecting fake reviews of online
products. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services 64 (2022), 102771.
[66] Vlad Sandulescu and Martin Ester. 2015. Detecting singleton review spammers
using semantic similarity. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference on
World Wide Web. 971–976.
[67] Robert M Schindler and Barbara Bickart. 2012. Perceived helpfulness of online
consumer reviews: The role of message content and style. Journal of Consumer
Behaviour 11, 3 (2012), 234–243.
[68] Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. 2015. Neural machine
translation of rare words with subword units. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.07909
(2015).
[69] RJ Senter and Edgar A Smith. 1967. Automated readability index. Technical
Report. Cincinnati Univ OH.
[70] Niklas Smedemark-Margulies, Robin Walters, Heiko Zimmermann, Lucas Laird,
Christian van der Loo, Neela Kaushik, Rajmonda Caceres, and Jan-Willem van de
Meent. 2022. Probabilistic program inference in network-based epidemiological
simulations. PLOS Computational Biology 18, 11 (2022), 1–40.
[71] Irene Solaiman, Miles Brundage, Jack Clark, Amanda Askell, Ariel Herbert-Voss,
Jeff Wu, Alec Radford, Gretchen Krueger, Jong Wook Kim, Sarah Kreps, et al.
2019. Release strategies and the social impacts of language models. (2019).
arXiv:1908.09203.
[72] Wonho Song, Sangkon Park, and Doojin Ryu. 2017. Information quality of
online reviews in the presence of potentially fake reviews. Korean Economic
Review 33 (2017), 5–34.
[73] Periakaruppan Sudhakaran, Shanmugasundaram Hariharan, and Joan Lu. 2016.
A framework investigating the online user reviews to measure the biasness
for sentiment analysis. Asian Journal of Information Technology 15, 12 (2016),
1890–1898.
[74] Huan Sun, Alex Morales, and Xifeng Yan. 2013. Synthetic review spamming
and defense. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining. 1088–1096.
[75] Jenny Sussin and Ed Thompson. 2012. The consequences of fake fans,‘Likes’
and reviews on social networks. Gartner Research 2091515 (2012).
[76] Tanya (Ya) Tang, Eric (Er) Fang, and Feng Wang. 2014. Is Neutral Really Neutral?
The Effects of Neutral User-Generated Content on Product Sales. Journal of
Marketing 78, 4 (2014), 41–58.
[77] Ramendra Thakur, Dena Hale, and John H Summey. 2018. What motivates
consumers to partake in cyber shilling? Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice
26, 1-2 (2018), 181–195.
[78] Tripadvisor. 2021. Review Transparency Report. Retrieved January 7, 2023 from
https://www.tripadvisor.com/InfoCenterV6?ctr=transparency_report_2021
[79] Prasad Vana and Anja Lambrecht. 2021. The Effect of Individual Online Reviews
on Purchase Likelihood. Marketing Science 40, 4 (2021), 708–730.
[80] Camilla Vásquez. 2014. The discourse of online consumer reviews. Bloomsbury
Publishing.
[81] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is All you
Need. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, I. Guyon, U. Von
Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett
(Eds.), Vol. 30. Curran Associates, Inc.
[82] Eka Dyar Wahyuni and Arif Djunaidy. 2016. Fake review detection from a
product review using modified method of iterative computation framework. In
MATEC web of conferences, Vol. 58. EDP Sciences, 03003.
[83] Yun Wan and Makoto Nakayama. 2014. The reliability of online review helpful-
ness. Journal of Electronic Commerce Research 15, 3 (2014), 179.
[84] Cuicui Wang, Yun Li, Xuan Luo, Qingguo Ma, Weizhong Fu, and Huijian Fu.
2018. The effects of money on fake rating behavior in e-commerce: Electro-
physiological time course evidence from consumers. Frontiers in neuroscience
12 (2018), 156.
[85] Yuan Wang and Minghe Guo. 2014. A Short Analysis of Discourse Coherence.
Journal of Language Teaching and Research 5 (03 2014).
[86] Zhuo Wang, Songmin Gu, and Xiaowei Xu. 2018. GSLDA: LDA-based group
spamming detection in product reviews. Applied Intelligence 48 (2018), 3094–
3107.
[87] Yuanyuan Wu, Eric W.T. Ngai, Pengkun Wu, and Chong Wu. 2020. Fake online
reviews: Literature review, synthesis, and directions for future research. Decision
Support Systems 132 (2020), 113280. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S016792362030035X
[88] Sihong Xie, Guan Wang, Shuyang Lin, and Philip S Yu. 2012. Review spam
detection via temporal pattern discovery. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD
international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. 823–831.
[89] Yukuan Xu, Zili Zhang, Rob Law, and Ziqiong Zhang. 2020. Effects of online
reviews and managerial responses from a review manipulation perspective.
Current Issues in Tourism 23, 17 (2020), 2207–2222.
[90] Yuanshun Yao, Bimal Viswanath, Jenna Cryan, Haitao Zheng, and Ben Y. Zhao.
2017. Automated Crowdturfing Attacks and Defenses in Online Review Systems.
In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Commu-
nications Security (Dallas, Texas, USA) (CCS ’17). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1143–1158.
[91] Kyung-Hyan Yoo and Ulrike Gretzel. 2009. Comparison of Deceptive and
Truthful Travel Reviews. In Information and Communication Technologies in
Tourism 2009, Wolfram Höpken, Ulrike Gretzel, and Rob Law (Eds.). Springer
Vienna, Vienna, 37–47.
[92] W. J. Youden. 1950. Index for rating diagnostic tests. Cancer 3, 1 (1950), 32–35.
[93] Dongsong Zhang, Lina Zhou, Juan Luo Kehoe, and Isil Yakut Kilic. 2016. What
online reviewer behaviors really matter? Effects of verbal and nonverbal behav-
iors on detection of fake online reviews. Journal of Management Information
Systems 33, 2 (2016), 456–481.
12

[94] Jurui Zhang. 2019. What’s yours is mine: exploring customer voice on Airbnb
using text-mining approaches. Journal of Consumer Marketing (2019).
[95] Lu Zhang, Zhiang Wu, and Jie Cao. 2017. Detecting spammer groups from
product reviews: a partially supervised learning model. IEEE Access 6 (2017),
2559–2568.
[96] Mengxia Zhang and Lan Luo. 2022. Can Consumer-Posted Photos Serve as a
Leading Indicator of Restaurant Survival? Evidence from Yelp. Management
Science (2022).
[97] Tao Zhang, Gang Li, TCE Cheng, and Kin Keung Lai. 2017. Welfare econom-
ics of review information: Implications for the online selling platform owner.
International Journal of Production Economics 184 (2017), 69–79.
[98] Wen Zhang, Yuhang Du, Taketoshi Yoshida, and Qing Wang. 2018. DRI-RCNN:
An approach to deceptive review identification using recurrent convolutional
neural network. Information Processing & Management 54, 4 (2018), 576–592.
[99] Yi Zhao, Sha Yang, Vishal Narayan, and Ying Zhao. 2013. Modeling consumer
learning from online product reviews. Marketing science 32, 1 (2013), 153–169.
[100] Mengzhou Zhuang, Geng Cui, and Ling Peng. 2018. Manufactured opinions:
The effect of manipulating online product reviews. Journal of Business Research
87 (2018), 24–35.
A
REPLICATION CODE
Detailed replication code for the modeling part is provided at
https://github.com/iamalegambetti/combat-ai-restaurants.git. Ex-
periments notebooks are included to quickly document model per-
formance.
13
