arXiv:2011.09926v3  [cs.LG]  19 May 2022
1
Challenges in Deploying Machine Learning: a Survey of
Case Studies
ANDREI PALEYES, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
RAOUL-GABRIEL URMA, Cambridge Spark, United Kingdom
NEIL D. LAWRENCE, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
In recent years, machine learning has transitioned from a ﬁeld of academic research interest to a ﬁeld capable
of solving real-world business problems. However, the deployment of machine learning models in produc-
tion systems can present a number of issues and concerns. This survey reviews published reports of deploy-
ing machine learning solutions in a variety of use cases, industries and applications and extracts practical
considerations corresponding to stages of the machine learning deployment workﬂow. By mapping found
challenges to the steps of the machine learning deployment workﬂow we show that practitioners face issues
at each stage of the deployment process. The goal of this paper is to lay out a research agenda to explore
approaches addressing these challenges.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Machine learning.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Machine learning applications, sofware deployment
ACM Reference Format:
Andrei Paleyes, Raoul-Gabriel Urma, and Neil D. Lawrence. 2022. Challenges in Deploying Machine Learning:
a Survey of Case Studies. ACM Comput. Surv. 1, 1, Article 1 (January 2022), 29 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3533378
1
INTRODUCTION
Machine learning (ML) has evolved from being an area of academic research to an applied ﬁeld.
According to a recent global survey conducted by McKinsey, machine learning is increasingly
adopted in standard business processes with nearly 25 percent year-over-year growth [1] and
with growing interest from the general public, business leaders [2] and governments [3].
This shift comes with challenges. Just as with any other ﬁeld, there are signiﬁcant diﬀerences
between what works in an academic setting and what is required by a real world system. Cer-
tain bottlenecks and invalidated preconceptions should always be expected in the course of that
process. As more solutions are developed and deployed, practitioners report their experience in
various forms, including publications and blog posts. Motivated by such reports and our personal
experiences, in this study we aim to survey the challenges in deploying machine learning in pro-
duction1 with the objective of understanding what parts of the deployment process cause the most
diﬃculties. First, we provide an overview of the machine learning deployment workﬂow. Second,
1By production we understand the setting where a product or a service are made available for use by its intended audience.
Authors’ addresses: Andrei Paleyes, University of Cambridge, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Cam-
bridge, United Kingdom, ap2169@cam.ac.uk; Raoul-Gabriel Urma, Cambridge Spark, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
raoul@cambridgespark.com; Neil D. Lawrence, University of Cambridge, Department of Computer Science and Technol-
ogy, Cambridge, United Kingdom, ndl21@cam.ac.uk.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses,
contact the owner/author(s).
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
0360-0300/2022/1-ART1
https://doi.org/10.1145/3533378
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

1:2
Andrei Paleyes, Raoul-Gabriel Urma, and Neil D. Lawrence
we review case studies to extract problems and concerns practitioners have at each particular de-
ployment stage. Third, we discuss cross-cutting aspects that aﬀect every stage of the deployment
workﬂow: ethical considerations, law, end users’ trust and security. Finally, we conclude with a
brief discussion of potential solutions to these issues and further work.
Ours is not the ﬁrst survey of machine learning in production. A decade ago, such surveys were
already conducted, albeit with a diﬀerent purpose in mind. Machine learning was mainly a research
discipline, and it was uncommon to see ML solutions deployed for a business problem outside of
“Big Tech” companies in the information technology industry. So, the purpose of such a survey
was to show that ML can be used to solve a variety of problems, and illustrate it with examples,
as was done by Pěchouček and Mařík [4]. Nowadays the focus has changed: machine learning
is commonly adopted in many industries, and the question becomes not “Where is it used?”, but
rather “How diﬃcult is it to use?”
One approach to assess the current state of machine learning deployment for businesses is a
survey conducted among professionals. Such surveys are primarily undertaken by private compa-
nies, and encompass a variety of topics. Algorithmia’s report ([5, 6]) goes deep into the deployment
timeline, with the majority of companies reporting between 8 and 90 days to deploy a single model,
and 18% taking even more time. A report by IDC [7] surveyed 2,473 organizations and found that
a signiﬁcant portion of their attempted AI deployments fail, quoting lack of expertise, bias in data
and high costs as primary reasons. O’Reilly has conducted an interview study that focused on ML
practitioners’ work experience and tools they use [8]. Broader interview-based reports have also
been produced by dotscience [9] and dimensional research [10].
While there are a number of business reports on the topic, the challenges of the entire machine
learning deployment pipeline are not covered nearly as widely in the academic literature. There
is a burgeoning ﬁeld of publications focusing on speciﬁc aspects of deployed ML, such as Bhatt
et al. [11] which focuses on explainable ML or Amershi et al. [12] which discusses software en-
gineering aspects of deploying ML. A large number of industry-speciﬁc surveys also exist, and
we review some of these works in the appropriate sections below. However, the only general pur-
pose survey we found is Baier et al. [13], which combines a literature review and interviews with
industry partners. In contrast with that paper, which concentrates on the experience of the infor-
mation technology sector, we aim at covering case studies from a wide variety of industries, thus
increasing the breadth of our survey. We also discuss the most commonly reported challenges in
the literature in much greater detail.
In our survey we consider three main types of papers:
• Case study papers that report experience from a single ML deployment project. Such works
usually go deep into discussing each challenge the authors faced and how it was overcome.
• Review papers that describe applications of ML in a particular ﬁeld or industry. These re-
views normally give a summary of challenges that are most commonly encountered during
the deployment of the ML solutions in the reviewed ﬁeld.
• “Lessons learned” papers where authors reﬂect on their past experiences of deploying ML
in production.
To ensure that this survey focuses on the current challenges, only papers published in the last ﬁve
years are considered, with only a few exceptions to this rule. We also refer to other types of papers
where it is appropriate, e.g. practical guidance reports, interview studies and regulations. We have
not conducted any interviews ourselves as part of this study. Further work and extensions are
discussed at the end of this paper.
The main contribution of our paper is to show that practitioners face challenges at each stage
of the machine learning deployment workﬂow. This survey supports our goal to raise awareness
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

Challenges in Deploying Machine Learning: a Survey of Case Studies
1:3
in the academic community of the variety of problems that practitioners face when deploying
machine learning and start a discussion on what can be done to address these problems.
2
MACHINE LEARNING DEPLOYMENT WORKFLOW
For the purposes of this work we are using the ML deployment workﬂow deﬁnition suggested by
Ashmore et al. [14], however it is possible to conduct a similar review with any other ML pipeline
description, such as CRISP-DM [15] or TDSP [16]. In this section we give a brief overview of the
deﬁnition we are using.
According to Ashmore et. al. [14], the process of developing an ML-based solution in an indus-
trial setting consists of four stages2:
• Data management, which focuses on preparing data that is needed to build a machine
learning model;
• Model learning, where model selection and training happens;
• Model veriﬁcation, the main goal of which is to ensure the model adheres to certain func-
tional and performance requirements;
• Model deployment, which is about integration of the trained model into the software in-
frastructure that is necessary to run it. This stage also covers questions around model main-
tenance and updates.
Each of these stages is broken down further into smaller steps. It is important to highlight that
the apparent sequence of this description is not necessarily the norm in a real-life scenario. It is
perfectly normal for these stages to run in parallel to a certain degree and inform each other via
feedback loops. Therefore this or any similar breakdown should be considered not as a timeline, but
rather as a useful abstraction to simplify references to concrete parts of the deployment pipeline.
We have chosen this representation of the workﬂow because comparing to alternatives it deﬁnes
a larger number of deployment steps, which allows for ﬁner classiﬁcation of the challenges.
For the remainder of this paper we discuss common issues practitioners face at each step. We also
discuss cross-cutting aspects that can aﬀect every stage of the deployment pipeline. Where appro-
priate, the concrete class of ML problems is speciﬁed (such as supervised learning or reinforcement
learning), although the majority of the challenges can be encountered during the deployment of
many types of learning tasks. Table 1 provides a summary of the issues and concerns we discuss.
By providing illustrative examples for each step of the workﬂow we show how troublesome the
whole deployment experience can be. Note that the order in which challenges appear in that table
and in the paper does not necessarily reﬂect their severity. The impact that a particular issue can
have on a deployment project depends on a large variety of factors, such as business area, avail-
ability of resources, team experience, and more. For that reason we do not attempt to prioritize
the challenges discussed in the survey.
Table 1. All considerations, issues and concerns explored in this study. Each is assigned to the stage and step
of the deployment workflow where it is commonly encountered.
Deployment Stage
Deployment Step
Considerations, Issues and Concerns
Data management
Data collection
Data discovery
Data preprocessing
Data dispersion
Data cleaning
Data augmentation
Labeling of large volumes of data
2There is a requirements formulation stage that Ashmore et al. do not consider a part of the ML workﬂow. Similarly, we
see this as a challenge across many domains and thus out of scope of this study. We refer interested readers to the work
by Takeuchi and Yamamoto [17].
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

1:4
Andrei Paleyes, Raoul-Gabriel Urma, and Neil D. Lawrence
Table 1. Continued: All considerations, issues and concerns explored in this study. Each is assigned to the
stage and step of the deployment workflow where it is commonly encountered.
Deployment Stage
Deployment Step
Considerations, Issues and Concerns
Access to experts
Lack of high-variance data
Data analysis
Data proﬁling
Model learning
Model selection
Model complexity
Resource-constrained environments
Interpretability of the model
Training
Computational cost
Environmental impact
Privacy-aware training
Hyper-parameter selection
Resource-heavy techniques
Unknown search space
Hardware-aware optimization
Model veriﬁcation
Requirement encoding
Performance metrics
Business driven metrics
Formal veriﬁcation
Regulatory frameworks
Test-based veriﬁcation
Simulation-based testing
Data validation routines
Edge case testing
Model deployment
Integration
Operational support
Reuse of code and models
Software engineering anti-patterns
Mixed team dynamics
Monitoring
Feedback loops
Outlier detection
Custom design tooling
Updating
Concept drift
Continuous delivery
Cross-cutting aspects
Ethics
Aggravation of biases
Fairness and accountability
Authorship
Decision making
Law
Country-level regulations
Abiding by existing legislation
Focus on technical solution only
End users’ trust
Involvement of end users
User experience
Explainability score
Security
Data poisoning
Model stealing
Model inversion
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

Challenges in Deploying Machine Learning: a Survey of Case Studies
1:5
3
DATA MANAGEMENT
Data is an integral part of any machine learning solution. The overall eﬀectiveness of the solution
depends on the training and test data as much as on the algorithm. The process of creating quality
datasets is usually the very ﬁrst stage in any production ML pipeline. Unsurprisingly, practitioners
face a range of issues while working with data as reported by Polyzotis et al. [18]. Consequently,
this stage consumes time and energy that is often not anticipated beforehand. In this section, we
describe issues concerning four steps within data management: data collection, data preprocessing,
data augmentation and data analysis. Note that we consider storage infrastructure challenges, such
as setting up databases and query engines, beyond the scope of this survey. We refer readers to
the survey by Cai et al. [19] for further discussion of big data storage.
3.1
Data collection
Data collection involves activities that aim to discover and understand what data is available, as
well as how to organize convenient storage for it. The task of discovering what data exists and
where it is can be a challenge by itself, especially in large production environments typically found
within organizations [20]. Finding data sources and understanding their structure is a major task,
which may prevent data scientists from even getting started on the actual application development.
As explained by Lin and Ryaboy [21], at Twitter this situation often happened as a result of the
same entity (e.g. a Twitter user) being processed by multiple services. Internally Twitter consists
of multiple services calling each other, and every service is responsible for a single operation. This
approach, known in software engineering as the “single responsibility principle” [22], results in an
architecture that is very ﬂexible in terms of scalability and modiﬁcation. However, the ﬂip side of
this approach is that at a large scale it is very hard to keep track of what data related to the entity
is being stored by which service, and in which form. Some data may only exist in a form of logs,
which by their nature are not easily parsed or queried. An even worse case is the situation when
data is not stored anywhere, and to build a dataset one needs to generate synthetic service API
calls. Such dispersion of data creates major hurdles for data scientists, because without a clear idea
of what data is available or can be obtained it is often impossible to understand what ML solutions
can achieve.
3.2
Data preprocessing
The preprocessing step normally involves a range of data cleaning activities: identiﬁcation of a
schema, imputation of missing values, reduction of data into an ordered and simpliﬁed form, and
mapping from raw form into a more convenient format. Methods for carrying out data manipula-
tions like this is an area of research that goes beyond the scope of this study. We encourage readers
to refer to review papers on the topic, such as Abedjan et al. [23], Patil and Kulkarni [24], Ridzuan
et al. [25].
A lesser known but important problem that can also be considered an object of the preprocess-
ing step is data dispersion. It often turns out that there can be multiple relevant separate data
sources that may have diﬀerent schemas, diﬀerent conventions, and their own way of storing and
accessing the data. Joining this information into a single dataset suitable for machine learning can
be a complicated task in its own right, known as the data integration process [26]. An example of
this is what developers of Firebird faced [27]. Firebird is an advisory system in the Atlanta Fire
Department, that helps identify priority targets for ﬁre inspections. As a ﬁrst step towards devel-
oping Firebird data was collected from 12 datasets including the history of ﬁre incidents, business
licenses, households and more. These datasets were combined to give a single dataset covering all
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

1:6
Andrei Paleyes, Raoul-Gabriel Urma, and Neil D. Lawrence
relevant aspects of each property monitored by the Fire Department. Authors particularly high-
light data joining as a diﬃcult problem. Given the fact that buildings can be identiﬁed through their
geospatial location, each dataset contained spatial data specifying the building’s address. Spatial
information can be presented in diﬀerent formats, and sometimes contains minor diﬀerences such
as diﬀerent spellings. All this needed to be cleaned and corrected. These corrections can be highly
time consuming and proved to be so in the Firebird project.
3.3
Data augmentation
There are multiple reasons why data might need to be augmented, and in practice one of the most
problematic ones is the absence of labels. A label is a value that the ML model seeks to predict
from the input data in a classic supervised learning setting. Real-world data is often unlabeled,
thus labeling turns out to be a challenge in its own right. We discuss three possible factors for lack
of labeled data: limited access to experts, absence of high-variance data, and sheer volume.
Label assignment is diﬃcult in environments that tend to generate large volumes of data, such
as network traﬃc analysis. To illustrate a scale of this volume, a single 1-GB/s Ethernet interface
can deliver up to 1.5 million packets per second. Even with a huge downsampling rate this is still a
signiﬁcant number, and each sampled packet needs to be traced in order to be labeled. This problem
is described by Pacheco et al. [28], which surveys applications of machine learning to network
traﬃc classiﬁcation, with tasks such as protocol identiﬁcation or attack detection. There are two
main ways of acquiring data in this domain, and both are complicated for labeling purposes:
• Uncontrolled, collecting real traﬃc. This approach requires complex tracking ﬂows belong-
ing to a speciﬁc application. Due to this complexity very few works implement reliable
ground truth assignment for real traﬃc.
• Controlled, emulating or generating traﬃc. This approach is very sensitive to the choice of
tooling and its ability to simulate the necessary traﬃc. Studies have shown that existing
tools for label assignment can introduce errors into collected ML datasets of network traf-
ﬁc data, going as high as almost 100% for certain applications [29]. Moreover, these tools’
performance degrades severely for encrypted traﬃc.
Access to experts can be another bottleneck for collecting high-quality labels. It is particularly
true for areas where expertise mandated by the labeling process is signiﬁcant, such as medical
image analysis [30]. Normally multiple experts are asked to label a set of images, and then these
labels are aggregated to ensure quality. This is rarely feasible for big datasets due to experts’ avail-
ability. A possible option here is to use noisy label oracles [31] or weak annotations [32], however
these approaches provide imprecise labels, which can lead to a loss in quality of the model [33].
Such losses are unacceptable in the healthcare industry, where even the smallest deviation can
cause catastrophic results (this is known as The Final Percent challenge according to Budd et al.
[30]).
Lack of access to high-variance data (data that covers large parts of the feature space) can be
among the main challenges one faces when deploying machine learning solutions from the lab
environment to the real world. Dulac-Arnold et al. [34] explain that this is the case for Reinforce-
ment Learning (RL). RL is an area of ML that focuses on intelligent agents that learn by taking
actions and receiving feedback from their environment. Agents make decisions on what action to
take next to maximize the reward based on their previous experience. It is common practice in RL
research to have access to separate environments for training and evaluation of an agent. However,
in practice all data comes from the real system, and the agent can no longer have a separate ex-
ploration policy - this is simply unsafe. Therefore the data available becomes low-variance - very
little of the state space is covered. While this approach ensures safety, it means that the agent is
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

Challenges in Deploying Machine Learning: a Survey of Case Studies
1:7
not trained to recognize an unsafe situation and make the right decision in it. A practical example
of this issue can be seen in the area of autonomous vehicle control [35]. There simulations are
often used for training, but complex interactions, such as friction, can be hard to model, and small
variations in simulation may result in the agent not being transferable to the real world.
Budd et al. [30] show that interface design directly impacts the quality of applications built to
collect annotations for unlabeled data. They discuss a range of projects that collected labels for
medical images, all of which beneﬁted from a well designed user interface. The authors conclude
that the end user interface plays a large part in the overall success of the annotation applications3.
3.4
Data analysis
Data needs to be analyzed to uncover potential biases or unexpected distribution shifts in it. Avail-
ability of high quality tools is essential for conducting any kind of data analysis. One area that
practitioners ﬁnd particularly challenging in that regard is visualization for data proﬁling [36].
Data proﬁling refers to all activities associated with troubleshooting data quality, such as missing
values, inconsistent data types and veriﬁcation of assumptions. Despite obvious relevance to the
ﬁelds of databases and statistics, there are still too few tools that enable the eﬃcient execution of
these data mining tasks. The need for such tools becomes apparent considering that, according to
the survey conducted by Microsoft [37], data scientists think data issues are the main reason to
doubt the quality of the overall work.
4
MODEL LEARNING
Model learning is the stage of the deployment workﬂow that enjoys the most attention within
the academic community. As an illustration of the scale of the ﬁeld’s growth, the number of sub-
missions to NeurIPS, a primary conference on ML methods, has quadrupled in six years, going
from 1678 submissions in 2014 to 6743 in 2019 [38]. Nevertheless, there are still plenty of practical
considerations that aﬀect the model learning stage. In this section, we discuss issues concerning
three steps within model learning: model selection, training and hyper-parameter selection.
4.1
Model selection
In many practical cases the selection of a model is decided by one key characteristic of a model:
complexity. Despite areas such as deep learning and reinforcement learning gaining in popularity
with the research community, in practice simpler models are often chosen. Such models include
shallow neural network architectures, simple approaches based on Principal Component Analysis
(PCA), decision trees and random forests.
Simple models can be used as a way to prove the concept of the proposed ML solution and get
the end-to-end setup in place. This approach reduces the time to get a deployed solution, allows
the collection of important feedback and also helps avoid overcomplicated designs. This was the
case reported by Haldar et al. [39]. In the process of applying machine learning to AirBnB search,
the team started with a complex deep learning model. The team was quickly overwhelmed by its
complexity and ended up consuming development cycles. After several failed deployment attempts
the neural network architecture was drastically simpliﬁed: a single hidden layer NN with 32 fully
connected ReLU activations. Even such a simple model had value, as it allowed the building of a
whole pipeline of deploying ML models in a production setting, while providing reasonably good
performance4. Over time the model evolved, with a second hidden layer being added, but it still
remained fairly simple, never reaching the initially intended level of complexity.
3For further discussion of the role user interface can play in adoption of an ML system, see Section 7.3.
4We discuss more beneﬁts of setting up the automated deployment pipeline in Section 6.3.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

1:8
Andrei Paleyes, Raoul-Gabriel Urma, and Neil D. Lawrence
Another advantage that less complex models can oﬀer is their relatively modest hardware re-
quirements. This becomes a key decision point in resource constrained environments, as shown
by Wagstaﬀet al. [40]. They worked on deploying ML models to a range of scientiﬁc instruments
onboard the Europa Clipper spacecraft. Spacecraft design is always a trade-oﬀbetween the total
weight, robustness and the number of scientiﬁc tools onboard. Therefore computational resources
are scarce and their usage has to be as small as possible. These requirements naturally favor the
models that are light on computational demands. The team behind Europa Clipper used machine
learning for three anomaly detection tasks, some models took time series data as input and some
models took images, and on all three occasions simple threshold or PCA based techniques were
implemented. They were speciﬁcally chosen because of their robust performance and low demand
for computational power.
A further example of a resource-constrained environment is wireless cellular networks, where
energy, memory consumption and data transmission are very limited. Most advanced techniques,
such as deep learning, are not considered yet for practical deployment, despite being able to handle
high dimensional mobile network data [41].
The ability to interpret the output of a model into understandable business domain terms often
plays a critical role in model selection, and can even outweigh performance considerations. For
that reason decision trees (DT) [42], which can be considered a fairly basic ML algorithm, are
widely used in practice. DT presents its branching logic in a transparent way that resembles human
decision process, which allows for interpretation and auditing. Hansson et al. [43] describe several
cases in manufacturing that adopt DT because of their interpretability.
Banking is another industry where DT ﬁnds extensive use. As an illustrative example, it is used
by Keramati et al. [44] where the primary goal of the ML application is predicting churn in an
interpretable way through if-then rules. While it is easy to imagine more complicated models
learning the eventual input-output relationship for this speciﬁc problem, interpretability is key
requirement here because of the need to identify the features of churners. The authors found DT
to be the best model to fulﬁll this requirement.
Nevertheless, deep learning (DL) is commonly used for practical background tasks that require
analysis of a large amount of previously acquired data. This notion is exempliﬁed by the ﬁeld of un-
manned aerial vehicles (UAV) [45]. Data collected by image sensors is the most common UAV data
modality being exploited by DL, because of the sensors’ low cost, low weight, and low power con-
sumption. DL oﬀers excellent capabilities for processing and presentation of raw images acquired
from sensors, but computational resource demands still remain the main blocker for deploying DL
as an online processing instrument on board UAVs.
4.2
Training
Model training is the process of feeding the chosen model with a collected dataset in order to learn
certain patterns or representations of the data. One of the biggest concerns with the model training
stage is the economic cost associated with carrying out the training procedure due to the compu-
tational resources required. This is often true in the ﬁeld of natural language processing (NLP),
as illustrated by Sharir et al. [46]. The authors observe that while the cost of individual ﬂoating-
point operations is decreasing, the overall cost of training NLP is only growing. They took one of
the state-of-the-art models in the ﬁeld, BERT [47], and found out that depending on the chosen
model size full training procedure can cost anywhere between $50k and $1.6m in cloud computing
resources, which is unaﬀordable for most research institutions and many companies. The authors
observe that training dataset size, number of model parameters and number of operations used by
the training procedure are all contributing towards the overall cost. Of particular importance here
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

Challenges in Deploying Machine Learning: a Survey of Case Studies
1:9
is the second factor: novel NLP models are already using billions of parameters, and this number
is expected to increase further in the near future [48].
A related concern is raised by Strubell et al. [49] regarding the impact the training of ML models
has on the environment. By consuming more and more computational resources, ML model train-
ing is driving up energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. According to the estimates
provided in the paper, one full training cycle utilizing neural architecture search emits an amount
of CO2 comparable to what four average cars emit in their whole lifetime. The authors stress how
important it is for researchers to be aware of such impact of model training, and argue that the com-
munity should give higher priority to computationally eﬃcient hardware and algorithms. Similar
concerns around environmental impact are voiced by Bender et al. [50].
As more businesses start using ML techniques on their users’ data, concerns are being raised
over the privacy of data and how well individuals’ sensitive information is preserved over the
course of the model training process [51]. Illustrating the gravity of this concern, Shokri et al.
constructed an attack for membership inference, that is to determine if a given input record was
a part of the model’s training dataset. They veriﬁed it on models trained on leading ML-as-a-
service providers [52], achieving anywhere from 70% up to 94% accuracy of membership inference.
Consequently companies have to consider privacy-aware approaches, which most likely come at
a cost of the model accuracy. Navigating the trade-oﬀbetween privacy and utility is considered an
open challenge for practitioners dealing with sensitive data [53]. Some of the ways this trade-oﬀ
is resolved in practice are diﬀerential privacy that explicitly corrupts the data [54], homomorphic
encryption that restricts the class of learning algorithm but allows for training on encrypted data
[55], and federated learning that distributes training across personal devices to preserve privacy,
but thereby constrains the algorithms that can be used for model ﬁtting [56].
4.3
Hyper-parameter selection
In addition to parameters that are learned during the training process, many ML models also re-
quire hyper-parameters. Examples of such hyper-parameters are the depth of a decision tree, the
number of hidden layers in a neural network or the number of neighbors in k-Nearest Neighbors
classiﬁer. Hyper-parameter optimization (HPO) is the process of choosing the optimal setting of
these hyper-parameters. Most HPO techniques involve multiple training cycles of the ML model.
This is computationally challenging because in the worst case the size of the HPO task grows ex-
ponentially: each new hyper-parameter adds a new dimension to the search space. As discussed
by Yang and Shami [57], these considerations make HPO techniques very expensive and resource-
heavy in practice, especially for applications of deep learning. Even approaches like Hyperband
[58] or Bayesian optimization [59], that are speciﬁcally designed to minimize the number of train-
ing cycles needed, are not yet able to deal with the high dimensional searches that emerge when
many hyper-parameters are involved. Large datasets complicate matters by leading to long train-
ing times for each search.
Many hyper-parameter tuning approaches require the user to deﬁne a complete search space,
i.e. the set of possible values each of the hyper-parameters can take. Unfortunately, in practical use
cases this is often impossible due to insuﬃcient knowledge about the problem at hand. Setting the
hyper-parameter optimization bounds remains one of the main obstacles preventing wider use of
the state-of-the-art HPO techniques [60].
HPO often needs to take into account speciﬁc requirements imposed by the environment where
the model will run. This is exempliﬁed by Marculescu et al. [61] in the context of hardware-aware
ML. In order to deploy models to embedded and mobile devices, one needs to be aware of energy
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

1:10
Andrei Paleyes, Raoul-Gabriel Urma, and Neil D. Lawrence
and memory constraints imposed by such devices. This creates a need for customized hardware-
aware optimization techniques that eﬃciently optimize for the accuracy of the model and the
hardware jointly.
5
MODEL VERIFICATION
Veriﬁcation is considered an essential step in any software development cycle as it ensures the
quality of the product and reduces maintenance costs. As is the case with any software, ML mod-
els should generalize well to unseen inputs, demonstrate reasonable handling of edge cases and
overall robustness, as well as satisfy all functional requirements. In this section, we discuss issues
concerning three steps within model veriﬁcation: requirement encoding, formal veriﬁcation and
test-based veriﬁcation.
5.1
Requirement encoding
Deﬁning requirements for a machine learning model is a crucial prerequisite of testing activities.
It often turns out that an increase in model performance does not translate into a gain in business
value, as Booking.com discovered after deploying 150 models into production [62]. One particular
reason they highlight is a failure of proxy metrics (e.g. clicks) to convert to the desired business
metric (e.g. conversion). Therefore, alongside accuracy measures, additional domain speciﬁc met-
rics need to be deﬁned and measured. Depending on the application these may be inspired by KPIs
and other business driven measures. In the case of Booking.com such metrics included conversion,
customer service tickets or cancellations. A cross-disciplinary eﬀort is needed to even deﬁne such
metrics, as understanding from modeling, engineering and business angles is required. Once de-
ﬁned, these metrics should also be used for monitoring the production environment and for quality
control of model updates.
Besides, simply measuring the accuracy of the ML model is not enough to understand its per-
formance. Performance metrics should also reﬂect audience priorities. For instance Sato et al. [63]
recommend validating models for bias and fairness, while in the case described by Wagstaﬀet al.
[40] controlling for consumption of spacecraft resources is crucial.
5.2
Formal Verification
The formal veriﬁcation step veriﬁes that software functionality follows the requirements deﬁned
within the scope of the project. For ML models such veriﬁcation could include mathematical proofs
of correctness or numerical estimates of output error bounds, but as Ashmore et. al. [14] point out
this rarely happens in practice. More often, quality standards are being formally set via extensive
regulatory frameworks that deﬁne what quality means and how models can be shown to meet
them.
An example of where ML solutions have to adhere to regulations is the banking industry [64].
This requirement was developed in the aftermath of the global ﬁnancial crisis, as the industry real-
ized that there was a need for heightened scrutiny towards models. As a consequence an increased
level of regulatory control is now being applied to the processes that deﬁne how the models are
built, approved and maintained. For instance, oﬃcial guidelines have been published by the UK’s
Prudential Regulation Authority [65] and European Central Bank [66]. These guidelines require
ML model risk frameworks to be in place for all business decision-making solutions, and implemen-
tation of such frameworks requires developers to have extensive tests suites in order to understand
the behavior of their ML models. The formal veriﬁcation step in that context means ensuring that
the model meets all criteria set by the corresponding regulations.
Regulatory frameworks share similarities with country-wide policies for governing the use of
ML-powered technology, which we discuss in greater detail in Section 7.1.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

Challenges in Deploying Machine Learning: a Survey of Case Studies
1:11
5.3
Test-based Verification
In the context of ML, test-based veriﬁcation is intended for ensuring that the model generalizes
well to previously unseen data. While collecting a validation dataset is usually not a problem,
as it can be derived from splitting the training dataset, it may not be suﬃcient for production
deployment.
In an ideal setting, testing is done in a real-life setting, where business driven metrics can be
observed, as we discussed in Section 5.1. Full scale testing in a real-world environment can be
challenging for a variety of safety, security and scale reasons, and is often substituted with test-
ing in simulation. That is the case for models for autonomous vehicles control [35]. Simulations
are cheaper, faster to run, and provide ﬂexibility to create situations rarely encountered in real
life. Thanks to these advantages, simulations are becoming prevalent in this ﬁeld. However, it is
important to remember that simulation-based testing hinges on assumptions made by simulation
developers, and therefore cannot be considered a full replacement for real-world testing. Even
small variations between simulation and real world can have drastic eﬀects on the system behav-
ior, and therefore the authors conclude that validation of the model and simulation environment
alone is not enough for autonomous vehicles. This point is emphasized further by the experiences
from the ﬁeld of reinforcement learning [34], where use of simulations is a de-facto standard for
training agents.
Hackett et al. presented an instructive use case of how limited simulation-based testing can be
[67]. The authors were part of a team that conducted an experiment that explored a reinforcement
learning based cognitive engine (CE) for running a software-deﬁned radio unit on board of the
International Space Station (ISS). Preparation for the experiment included extensive ground testing
in an emulated environment that informed many hyper-parameter choices and the computational
setup. Nevertheless when the software was deployed on ISS, the actual conditions of the testing
environment were so harsh the team was able to test only a subset of all planned experiments. The
authors observed that despite extensive preparation CE was unable to cope with these emergency
scenarios.
In addition, the dataset itself also needs to be constantly validated to ensure data errors do not
creep into the pipeline and do not aﬀect the overall quality. Data issues that go unnoticed can
cause problems down the line that are diﬃcult to troubleshoot. Breck et al. [68] argue that such
issues are common in the setup where data generation is decoupled from the ML pipeline. Data
issues can originate from bugs in code, feedback loops, changes in data dependencies. They can
propagate and manifest themselves at diﬀerent stages of the pipeline, therefore it is imperative to
catch them early by including data validation routines in the ML pipeline.
6
MODEL DEPLOYMENT
Machine learning systems running in production are complex software systems that have to be
maintained over time. This presents developers with another set of challenges, some of which are
shared with running regular software services, and some are unique to ML.
There is a separate discipline in engineering, called DevOps, that focuses on techniques and
tools required to successfully maintain and support existing production systems. Consequently,
there is a necessity to apply DevOps principles to ML systems. However, even though some of the
DevOps principles apply directly, there are also a number of challenges unique to productionizing
machine learning. This is discussed in detail by Dang et al. [69] which uses the term AIOps5 for
DevOps tasks for ML systems. Some of the challenges mentioned include lack of high quality
telemetry data as well as no standard way to collect it, diﬃculty in acquiring labels which makes
5Readers might have also encountered term MLOps (https://ml-ops.org/).
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

1:12
Andrei Paleyes, Raoul-Gabriel Urma, and Neil D. Lawrence
supervised learning approaches inapplicable6 and lack of agreed best practices around handling of
machine learning models. In this section, we discuss issues concerning three steps within model
deployment: integration, monitoring and updating.
6.1
Integration
The model integration step constitutes of two main activities: building the infrastructure to run
the model and implementing the model itself in a form that can be consumed and supported. While
the former is a topic that belongs almost entirely in systems engineering and therefore lies out of
scope of this work, the latter is of interest for our study, as it exposes important aspects at the
intersection of ML and software engineering. In fact, many concepts that are routinely used in
software engineering are now being reinvented in the ML context.
Code reuse is a common topic in software engineering, and ML can beneﬁt from adopting the
same mindset. Reuse of data and models can directly translate into savings in terms of time, eﬀort
or infrastructure. An illustrative case is an approach Pinterest took towards learning image em-
beddings [70]. There are three models used in Pinterest internally which use similar embeddings,
and initially they were maintained completely separately, in order to make it possible to iterate on
the models individually. However, this created engineering challenges, as every eﬀort in working
with these embeddings had to be multiplied by three. Therefore the team decided to investigate
the possibility of learning a universal set of embeddings. It turned out to be possible, and this reuse
ended up simplifying their deployment pipelines as well as improving performance on individual
tasks.
A broad selection of engineering problems that machine learning practitioners now face is given
in Sculley et al. [71]. Many of them are known anti-patterns in engineering7, but are currently wide-
spread in machine learning software. Some of these issues, such as abstraction boundary erosion
and correction cascades, are caused by the fact that ML is used in cases where the software has to
take an explicit dependency on external data. Others, such as glue code or pipeline jungles, stem
from the general tendency in the ﬁeld to develop general-purpose software packages. Yet another
source of problems discussed in the paper is the conﬁguration debt: in addition to all conﬁgura-
tions a regular software system may require ML systems to add a sizable number of ML-speciﬁc
conﬁguration settings that have to be set and maintained.
Researchers and software engineers often ﬁnd themselves working together on the same project
aiming to reach a business goal with a machine learning approach. On the surface there seems to
be a clear separation of responsibilities: researchers produce the model while engineers build the
infrastructure to run it. In reality, their areas of concern often overlap when considering the devel-
opment process, model inputs and outputs and performance metrics. Contributors in both roles
often work on the same code. Thus it is beneﬁcial to include researchers in the whole develop-
ment journey, making sure they own the product codebase along with the engineers, use the same
version control and participate in code reviews. Despite obvious onboarding and slow-start chal-
lenges, this approach was seen to bring long term beneﬁts in terms of speed and quality of product
delivery [12].
6.2
Monitoring
Monitoring is one of the issues associated with maintaining machine learning systems as reported
by Sculley et al. [71]. While monitoring is crucial for the maintenance of any software service,
6Please refer to Section 3.3 for detailed discussion about data labeling.
7In software engineering an anti-pattern is understood as a common response to a recurring problem that is considered
ineﬀective or counterproductive.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

Challenges in Deploying Machine Learning: a Survey of Case Studies
1:13
the ML community is in the early stages of understanding what are the key metrics of data and
models to monitor and how to trigger system alarms when they deviate from normal behavior.
Monitoring of evolving input data, prediction bias and overall performance of ML models is an
open problem. Another maintenance issue highlighted by this paper that is speciﬁc to data-driven
decision making is feedback loops. ML models in production can inﬂuence their own behavior over
time via regular retraining. While making sure the model stays up to date, it is possible to create
a feedback loop where the input to the model is being adjusted to inﬂuence its behavior. This can
be done intentionally, as well as inadvertently, which is a unique challenge when running live ML
systems.
Klaise et al. [72] point out the importance of outlier detection as a key instrument to ﬂag model
predictions that cannot be used in a production setting. The authors name two reasons for such
predictions to occur: the inability of the models to generalize outside of the training dataset and
overconﬁdent predictions on out-of-distribution instances due to poor calibration. Deployment of
the outlier detector can be a challenge in its own right, because labeled outlier data is scarce, and
the detector training often becomes a semi-supervised or even an unsupervised problem.
Additional insight on monitoring of ML systems can be found in Ackermann et al. [73]. This
paper describes an early intervention system (EIS) for two police departments in the US. On the
surface their monitoring objectives seem completely standard: data integrity checks, anomaly de-
tection and performance metrics. One would expect to be able to use out-of-the-box tooling for
these tasks. However, the authors explain that they had to build all these checks from scratch in
order to maintain good model performance. For instance, the data integrity check meant verifying
updates of a certain input table and checksums on historical records, the performance metric was
deﬁned in terms of the number of changes in top k outputs, and anomalies were tracked on rank-
order correlations over time. All of these monitoring tools required considerable investigation and
implementation. This experience report highlights a common problem with currently available
end-to-end ML platforms: the ﬁnal ML solutions are usually so sensitive to a problem’s speciﬁcs
that out-of-the-box tooling does not ﬁt their needs well.
As a ﬁnal remark we note that there is an overlap between the choice of metrics for monitoring
and validation. The latter topic is discussed in Section 5.1.
6.3
Updating
Once the initial deployment of the model is completed, it is often necessary to be able to update
the model later on in order to make sure it always reﬂects the most recent trends in data and the
environment. There are multiple techniques for adapting models to new data, including sched-
uled regular retraining and continual learning [74]. Nevertheless in the production setting model
updating is also aﬀected by practical considerations.
A particularly important problem that directly impacts the quality and frequency of model up-
date procedure is the concept drift, also known as dataset shift [75]. Concept drift in ML is un-
derstood as changes observed in joint distribution 푝(푋,푦), where 푋is the model input and 푦is
the model output. Such changes can occur discretely, for example after some outside event that
aﬀects the input data distribution, or continuously, when data is gradually changing over time.
Undetected, this phenomenon can have major adverse eﬀects on model performance, as is shown
by Jameel et al. [76] for classiﬁcation problems or by Celik and Vanschoren [77] in the AutoML
context. Concept drift can arise due to a wide variety of reasons. For example, the ﬁnance industry
faced turbulent changes as the ﬁnancial crisis of 2008 was unfolding, and if advanced detection
techniques were employed they could have provided additional insights into the ongoing crisis,
as explained by Masegosa et al. [78]. Changes in data can also be caused by an inability to avoid
ﬂuctuations in the data collection procedure, as described in the paper by Langenkämper et al.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

1:14
Andrei Paleyes, Raoul-Gabriel Urma, and Neil D. Lawrence
[79] which studies the eﬀects of slight changes in marine images on deep learning models’ perfor-
mance. Data shifts can have noticeable consequences even when occurring at a microscopic scale,
as Zenisek et al. [80] show in their research on predictive maintenance for wear and tear of indus-
trial machinery. Even though concept drift has been known for decades [81], these examples show
that it remains a critical problem for applications of ML today. Consequently, detection of concept
drift becomes a growing concern for teams that maintain ML models in production [82, 83], which
makes this challenge directly related to monitoring discussed in the previous section.
On top of the question of when to retrain the model to keep it up to date, there is an infrastruc-
tural question on how to deliver the model artifact to the production environment. In software
engineering such tasks are commonly solved with continuous delivery (CD), which is an approach
for accelerating the development cycle by building an automated pipeline for building, testing and
deploying software changes. CD for machine learning solutions is complicated because, unlike
in regular software products where changes only happen in the code, ML solutions experience
change along three axes: the code, the model and the data. An attempt to formulate CD for ML as
a separate discipline can be seen in Sato et al. [63]. This work describes the pieces involved and the
tools that can be used at each step of building the full pipeline. A direct illustration of the beneﬁts
that a full CD pipeline can bring to the real-life ML solution can be found in Wider and Deger [84].
While updating is necessary for keeping a model up to date with recent ﬂuctuations in the data,
it may also inﬂict damage on users or downstream systems because of the changes in the model’s
behavior, even without causing obvious software errors. To study updates in teams where AI is
used to support human decision making, Bansal et al. [85] introduced the notion of compatibil-
ity of an AI update. Authors deﬁne an update as compatible only if it does not violate the user’s
trust characterized via model behavior. The authors proceeded to show that updating an AI model
to increase accuracy, at the expense of compatibility, may degrade overall AI-Human team perfor-
mance. This line of research is continued by Srivastava et al. [86], who provide a detailed empirical
study of backward compatibility issues in ML systems. They show how ML model updates may
become backward incompatible due to optimization stochasticity or noisy training datasets. These
ﬁndings motivate the need for de-noising and compatibility-aware training methods as the means
to ensure reliable updates of deployed ML models.
7
CROSS-CUTTING ASPECTS
In this section we describe three additional aspects that ML projects have to consider: ethics, law,
end users’ trust, security. These aspects can aﬀect every stage of the deployment pipeline.
7.1
Ethics
Ethical considerations should always inform data collection and modeling activities8. As stated
in the report on ethical AI produced by the Alan Turing Institute [87], “it is essential to establish
a continuous chain of human responsibility across the whole AI project delivery workﬂow”. If
researchers and developers do not follow this recommendation, complications may come up due
to a variety of reasons, some of which we illustrate in this section.
Since ML models use previously seen data to make decisions, they can rely on hidden biases that
already exist in data - a behavior that is hard to foresee and detect. This eﬀect is discussed in detail
by O’Neil [88] in the ﬁeld of criminal justice. Models that calculate a person’s criminal “risk score”
are often marketed as a way to remove human bias. Nevertheless, they use seemingly neutral
demographic information like a neighborhood that often ends up serving as a proxy for more
8Here by “ethics” we understand moral principles and techniques that inform the responsible development and use of ML
or AI solutions.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

Challenges in Deploying Machine Learning: a Survey of Case Studies
1:15
sensitive data such as race. As a result, people are disadvantaged on the basis of race or income.
Machine translation is another example of an area where such hidden biases exist in data and can
be exploited via an ML system. Prates et al. [89] show a strong tendency towards male defaults
in popular online translation service in particular for ﬁelds typically associated with unbalanced
gender distribution, such as STEM.
Likewise, Soden et al. [90] mention the aggravation of social inequalities through the use of
biased training datasets as one of the main hurdles in applying ML to Disaster Risk Management
(DRM). It is argued that ML causes privacy and security9 concerns through a combination of pre-
viously distinct datasets. Reducing the role of both experts and the general public is also seen as
an ethical issue by DRM professionals, because they feel it increases the probability of error or
misuse. Similar worries about unintentional or malign misuse of ML decision making systems are
expressed by Muthiah et al. [91]. Their software for predicting civil unrest, called EMBERS, is de-
signed to be used as a forecasting and communication tool, however authors remark that it can
also be potentially misused by governments, either due to a misunderstanding of its role in society,
or deliberately.
ML models for facial analysis often become subjects to criticism due to their unethical behavior.
For example, Buolamwini and Gebru [92] analyzed popular datasets for facial analysis and discov-
ered them to be imbalanced on the basis of skin colour. They have also evaluated 3 commercial
classiﬁcation systems and showed darker-skinned females to be the most misclassiﬁed group. Au-
thors conclude that urgent attention towards gender and skin type is needed for businesses that
want to build genuinely fair facial analysis algorithms. Such questions about fairness and account-
ability of ML algorithms and data are studied by the branch of machine learning known as Fairness
in ML [93].
An interesting ethical aspect arises in the usage of ML in the ﬁeld of creative arts, discussed by
Anantrasirichai and Bull [94]. When a trained model is used to create a piece of visual art, it is
not entirely clear where the authorship of this piece resides. The questions of originality therefore
requires special attention. Closely related to this question is the growing concern of fake content
being generated with ML, such as deepfake images and video, which can be easily used for the
wrong purposes [95].
7.2
Law
As ML grows its inﬂuence on society’s everyday life, it is natural to expect more regulations to
govern how ML models should function and how businesses, governments and other bodies can
use them. Such legal frameworks can sometimes be used to guide decisions on ethics, although in
general ethics and legal should be considered separate aspects.
Various countries have produced regulations to protect personal data rights. Typically, the more
sensitive the information collected from the individual, the stronger the regulations governing its
use. Examples of such regulations include the General Data Protection Regulation in the European
Union [96] and ethical screening laws in a range of Asian countries [97]. One domain that deals
with some of the most sensitive information is healthcare. According to Han et al. [98], many
countries have strict laws in place to protect the data of patients, which makes the adoption of ML
in healthcare particularly diﬃcult. On one hand there is no doubt that these rules are absolutely
necessary to make sure people are comfortable with their data being used. On the other hand, the
amount of reviews, software updates and cycles of data collection/annotation that are required
make it exceptionally hard to keep up with technical advances in ML, as Han et al. [98] explain
following their experience deploying ML solutions in the healthcare sector in Japan.
9We discuss related cross-cutting security concerns in Section 7.4.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

1:16
Andrei Paleyes, Raoul-Gabriel Urma, and Neil D. Lawrence
Legislation takes time to develop, and often cannot keep up with the speed of progress in ML.
This phenomenon is well known in policymaking and has been discussed in the context of ML as
well as other technological advances by Marchant [99] or more recently by the World Economic
Forum [100, 101]. As Malan [101] explains, by the time regulations are written they can already
be out of date, resulting in a cat-and-mouse game that is wasteful on resources and causes legal
framework abuses. Additionally, it is generally challenging to formulate speciﬁc and unambiguous
laws for such a rapidly developing area as ML. For example, Wachter et al. show that GDPR lacks
precise language as well as explicit and well-deﬁned rights and safeguards, therefore failing to
guarantee the ‘right to explanation’ [102]. As a result of these challenges, ML applications often
have to abide by the existing laws of the area where they are deployed. Minssen et al. analyze
the current regulatory approaches to medical ML in the US and Europe, and discuss how existing
laws evaluate ML applications [103]. At the same time governments have to provide ML adoption
plans. For instance, the US Food and Drug Administration released an action plan outlining steps
the agency plans to take to produce a regulatory framework for medical ML solutions [104].
Companies should not be focusing solely on the technological side of their solutions, as Deep-
Mind and Royal Free NHS Foundation Trust discovered while working on Streams, an applica-
tion for automatic review of test results for serious conditions. Their initial collaboration was not
speciﬁc enough on the use of patient data and on patient involvement overall, which triggered
an investigation on their compliance with data protection regulations. The revised collaboration
agreement was far more comprehensive and included a patient and public engagement strategy in
order to ensure data is being used ethically [105].
7.3
End users’ trust
ML is often met cautiously by the end users [106], [3], [107]. On their own accord, models provide
minimal explanations, which makes it diﬃcult to persuade end users of their utility [98]. In order
to convince users to trust ML based solutions, the time has to be invested to build that trust. In
this section, we explore ways in which that is done in practice.
If an application has a well-deﬁned accessible audience, getting that audience involved early
in the project is an eﬃcient way to foster their conﬁdence in the end product. This approach is
very common in medicine, because the end product is often targeted at a well deﬁned group of
healthcare workers and/or patients. One example is the project called Sepsis Watch [108]. In this
project the goal was to build a model that estimates a patient’s risk of developing sepsis. It was not
the ﬁrst attempt at automating this prediction, and since previous attempts were considered fail-
ures, medical personnel were skeptical about the eventual success of Sepsis Watch. To overcome
this skepticism, the team prioritized building trust, with strong communication channels, early
engagement of stakeholders, front-line clinicians and decision makers, and established account-
ability mechanisms. One of the key messages of this work is that model interpretability has limits
as a trust-building tool, and other ways to achieve high credibility with the end users should be
considered. This aligns with conclusions made by “Project explAIn” which found that the relative
importance of explanations of AI decisions varies by context [109]. A similar argument is made
by Soden et al. [90], who explore the impact ML has on disaster risk management (DRM). Due to
the growing complexity of the ML solutions deployed, it is becoming harder for the public to par-
ticipate and consequently to trust the ML-based DRM services, such as ﬂooding area estimates or
prediction of damage from a hurricane. As a mitigation measure the authors recommend making
the development of these solutions as transparent as possible, by taking into account the voice
of residents in the areas portrayed by models as “at risk” and relying on open software and data
whenever possible. The importance of strong communication and engagement with early adopters
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

Challenges in Deploying Machine Learning: a Survey of Case Studies
1:17
is also emphasized by Mutembesa et al. [110] as they analyzed their experience of deploying a
nation-wide cassava disease surveillance system in Uganda.
While the projects described above focused on engagement and accountability, in other circum-
stances explainability is the key to building the trust of the target audience. This is often the case
when the users have experience and an understanding of ML. Rudin [111] called the ML commu-
nity to stop using black box models and explaining their behavior afterward, and instead design
models that are inherently interpretable. Bhatt et al. [11] analyzed explainability as a feature of ma-
chine learning models deployed within enterprises, and found that it is a must-have requirement
for most stakeholders, including executives, ML engineers, regulators, and others. Moreover, their
survey showed that explainability score is a desired model metric, along with measures of fair-
ness and robustness. Explainability is also necessary in cases where it is demanded by the existing
regulations10, and users will not trust decisions that are made automatically without provided ex-
planations. Wang et al. [112] describe such a requirement in the context of credit risk scoring. They
observed that the XGBoost algorithm outperforms traditional scorecard approaches, but lacks the
necessary explainability component. This prompted the authors to develop a custom loan decision
explanation technique for XGBoost, subsequently deployed by QuickBooks Capital.
A poorly designed user interface can be one of the main obstacles in the adoption of any new
technology. While this problem is not speciﬁc to ML, it is nevertheless worth mentioning it as
a challenge ML applications face. For example, Wang et. al. studied the deployment of the AI-
powered medical diagnosis tool "Brilliant Doctor" in rural China and discovered that the majority
of doctors could not use it productively. One of the main reasons quoted was the UX design that
did not take into account particularities of the environment (screen sizes, interaction with other
software in the clinic) where it was installed, often resulting in an unusable software [113]. On the
contrary, investing time in specialised user interfaces with tailored user experience can pay oﬀ
with fast user adoption. Developers of Firebird [27], a system that helps identify priority targets
for ﬁre inspection in the city of Atlanta, USA, found that the best way to avoid resistance from
the end users while transitioning to an ML solution as a replacement of the previously used pen-
and-paper method was to develop a user interface that presented the results of modelling in a
way that the end users (ﬁre oﬃcers and inspectors in the Fire dept) found most useful and clear.
Similarly, authors of EMBERS [91], a system that forecasts population-level events (such as protest),
in Latin America, noticed that their users have two modes of using the system: (a) high recall:
obtain most events, and then ﬁlter them using other methods; (b) high precision: focus on a speciﬁc
area or a speciﬁc hypothesis. To improve the user experience and thus increase their conﬁdence
in the product, the user interface was improved to easily support both modes. This case study
emphasizes the importance of context-aware personalization for ML systems’ interfaces, one of
the key observations delivered by “Project explAIn” [109].
7.4
Security
Machine Learning opens up opportunities for new types of security attacks across the whole ML
deployment workﬂow [114]. Specialised adversarial attacks for ML can occur on the model itself,
the data used for training and also the resulting predictions. The ﬁeld of adversarial machine
learning studies the eﬀect of such attacks against ML models and how to protect against them
[115, 116]. Recent work from Siva et al. found that industry practitioners are not equipped to
protect, detect and respond to attacks on their ML systems [117]. In this section, we describe the
three most common attacks reported in practice which aﬀect deployed ML models: data poisoning,
model stealing and model inversion. We focus speciﬁcally on adversarial machine learning and
10Eﬀects of regulations on ML deployment are also discussed in Section 5.2
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

1:18
Andrei Paleyes, Raoul-Gabriel Urma, and Neil D. Lawrence
consider other related general security concerns in deploying systems such as access control and
code vulnerabilities beyond the scope of our work.
In data poisoning, the goal of the adversarial attack is to deliberately corrupt the integrity of the
model during the training phase in order to manipulate the produced results. In data poisoning
scenarios an attacker is usually assumed to have access to the data that will ultimately be used
for training, for example by sending emails to victims to subvert their spam ﬁlter [118]. Poisoning
attacks are particularly relevant in situations where the machine learning model is continuously
updated with new incoming training data. Jagielski et al. reported that in a medical setting using
a linear model, the introduction of speciﬁc malicious samples with an 8% poisoning rate in the
training set resulted in incorrect dosage for half of the patients [119].
Data poisoning can also occur as a result of a coordinated collective eﬀort that exploits feedback
loops we have discussed in Section 6.2, as happened with Microsoft’s Twitter bot Tay [120]. Tay
was designed to improve its understanding of the language over time but was quickly inundated
with a large number of deliberately malevolent tweets. Within 16 hours of its release a troubling
percentage of Tay’s messages were abusive or oﬀensive, and the bot was taken down.
Another type of adversarial attack is reverse engineering a deployed model by querying its in-
puts (e.g. via a public prediction API) and monitoring the outputs. The adversarial queries are
crafted to maximize the extraction of information about the model in order to train a substitute
model. This type of attack is referred to as model stealing. In a nutshell, this attack results in the
loss of intellectual property which could be a key business advantage for the defender. Tramèr et
al. [121] have shown that it is possible to replicate models deployed in production from ML ser-
vices oﬀered by Google, Amazon and Microsoft across a range of ML algorithms including logistic
regression, decision trees, SVMs and neural networks. In their work, they report the number of
queries ranging from 650 to 4013 to extract an equivalent model and in time ranging from 70s to
2088s.
A related attack is that of model inversion where the goal of the adversarial attack is to recover
parts of the private training set, thereby breaking its conﬁdentiality. Fredrikson et al. have shown
that they could recover training data by exploiting models that report conﬁdence values along with
their predictions [122]. Veale et al. [123] emphasize the importance of protecting against model
inversion attacks as a critical step towards compliance with data protection laws such as GDPR.
8
DISCUSSION OF POTENTIAL SOLUTIONS
This survey looked at case studies from a variety of industries: computer networks, manufacturing,
space exploration, law enforcement, banking, and more. However, further growth of ML adoption
can be severely hindered by poor deployment experience. To make the ML deployment scalable
and accessible to every business that may beneﬁt from it, it is important to understand the most
critical pain points and to provide tools, services and best practices that address those points. We
see this survey as an initial step in this direction: by recognizing the most common challenges
currently being reported we hope to foster an active discussion within the academic community
about what possible solutions might be. We classify possible research avenues for solutions into
two categories, which we discuss below. We also give some concrete examples, but since the pur-
pose of this section is illustrative, we do not aim to provide a complete survey of ML tools and
development approaches.
8.1
Tools and services
The market for machine learning tools and services is experiencing rapid growth [124]. As a result,
tools for individual deployment problems are continuously developed and released. Consequently,
some of the problems we have highlighted can be solved with the right tool.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

Challenges in Deploying Machine Learning: a Survey of Case Studies
1:19
For example, this is most likely the case for operational maintenance of ML models, discussed in
Sections 6.2 and 6.3. Many platforms on the market oﬀer end-to-end experience for the user, taking
care of such things as data storage, retraining and deployment. Examples include AWS SageMaker
[125], Microsoft ML [126], Uber Michelangelo [127], TensorFlow TFX [128], MLﬂow [129] and
more. A typical ML platform would include, among other features, a data storage facility, model
hosting with APIs for training and inference operations, a set of common metrics to monitor model
health and an interface to accept custom changes from the user. By oﬀering managed infrastructure
and a range of out-of-the-box implementations for common tasks such platforms greatly reduce
the operational burden associated with maintaining the ML model in production.
Quality assurance, which is the focus of Section 5, also looks to be an area where better tools
can be of much assistance. Models can greatly beneﬁt from the development of a test suite to verify
their behavior, and the community actively develops tools for that purpose. Jenga [130] ensures
model’s robustness against errors in data, which very commonly occur in practice as was men-
tioned in Section 3. CheckList methodology [131] provides a formal approach towards assessing
the quality of NLP models. The Data Linter [132] inspects ML data sets to identify potential issues
in the data.
As discussed in Section 3.3, obtaining labels is often a problem with real world data. Weak
supervision has emerged as a separate ﬁeld of ML which looks for ways to address this challenge.
Consequently, a number of weak supervision libraries are now actively used within the community,
and show promising results in industrial applications. Some of the most popular tools include
Snorkel [133], Snuba [134] and cleanlab [135].
A growing ﬁeld of AutoML [136] aims to address challenges around a model selection and hyper-
parameter tuning, discussed in Sections 4.1 and 4.3. There is a large variety of tools that provide
general-purpose implementations of AutoML algorithms, such as Auto-keras [137], Auto-sklearn
[138] or TPOT [139]. However practical reports of applying AutoML to real world problems indi-
cate that practitioners need to exercise extreme caution, as AutoML methods might not be ready
for decision making in high-stakes areas yet [140, 141].
Given the potential damage an unnoticed dataset shift can cause to the quality of predictions of
deployed ML models (see Section 6.3), there are many techniques to detect and mitigate its eﬀects.
A large variety of methods based on dimensionality reduction and statistical hypothesis testing is
reviewed by Rabanser at al. [142], and are now implemented in software libraries (e.g. Alibi De-
tect [143]) and services (e.g. Azure ML11and AWS Sagemaker12), available for use in deployment’s
monitoring suites. The community has also made strides in developing strategies for dealing with
the shift once it was detected. We refer interested readers to the works on using domain adaptation
[144], meta-learning [145] and transfer learning [146, 147] as ways of addressing dataset shift.
Using speciﬁc tools for solving individual problems is a straightforward approach. However
practitioners need to be aware that by using a particular tool they introduce an additional depen-
dency into their solution. While a single additional dependency seems manageable, their number
can quickly grow and become a maintenance burden. Besides, as we mentioned above, new tools
for ML are being released constantly, thus presenting practitioners with the dilemma of choosing
the right tool by learning its strengths and shortcomings.
11https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/machine-learning/how-to-monitor-datasets
12https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/clarify-model-monitor-feature-attribution-drift.html
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

1:20
Andrei Paleyes, Raoul-Gabriel Urma, and Neil D. Lawrence
8.2
Holistic approaches
Even though ML deployments require software development, ML projects are fundamentally dif-
ferent from traditional software engineering projects. The main diﬀerences arise from unique ac-
tivities like data discovery, dataset preparation, model training, deployment success measurement,
etc. Some of these activities cannot be deﬁned precisely enough to have a reliable time estimate (as
discussed in Section 3.1 in regard to data collection), some require a diﬀerent style of project man-
agement (Section 6.1 discusses the challenges of managing mixed team engineers and scientists),
and some make it diﬃcult to measure the overall added value of the project (see Section 5.1 for the
discussion of translation of ML model performance to the business value). For these reasons ML
deployment projects often do not lend themselves well to widespread approaches to software en-
gineering management paradigms, and neither to common software architectural patterns [148].
Compared to classical software engineering (SE), ML introduces unique artifacts with unique
characteristics: datasets and models. Unlike program source and conﬁguration ﬁles, these artifacts
are not distributed as program code, and exist in the form of tabular or binary ﬁles. Regular SE
tools for such common operations as source control, branching and merging, review, cannot be
applied to these new artifacts "as is" [149]. Consequently it is essential to develop documentation
approaches that are most suitable for these artifacts. There is a growing body of literature that
aims to adapt existing or develop new practices for handling datasets and models in a coherent
and reliable way. Lawrence [150] proposes an approach toward classifying the readiness of data for
ML tasks, which Royal Society DELVE applied in one of their reports in the context of COVID-19
pandemic [20]. Gebru et al. suggested “datasheets for datasets” [151] in order to document dataset’s
motivation, composition, collection process and intended purposes. Data Version Control (DVC)
is an open-source project that aims to create a Git-like source control experience for datasets [152].
For models, Mitchell et al. [153] proposed model cards, short documents that accompany trained
models detailing their performance, intended use context, and other information that might be
relevant for model’s application.
Data Oriented Architectures (DOA, [154], [155], [156]) is an example of an idea that suggests re-
thinking how things are normally approached in software development, and by doing so promises
to solve many of the issues we have discussed in this survey. Speciﬁcally, the idea behind DOA is
to consider replacing micro-service architecture, widespread in current enterprise systems, with
dataﬂow-based architectures, thus making data ﬂowing between elements of business logic more
explicit and accessible. Micro-service architectures have been successful in supporting high scala-
bility and embracing the single responsibility principle. However, they also make data ﬂows hard
to trace, and it is up to owners of every individual service to make sure inputs and outputs are
being stored in a consistent form (these issues are also discussed Section 3.1). DOA provides a so-
lution to this problem by moving data to streams ﬂowing between stateless execution nodes, thus
making data available and traceable by design, therefore making simpler the tasks of data discov-
ery, collection and labeling. In its essence DOA proposes to acknowledge that modern systems are
often data-driven, and therefore need to prioritize data in their architectural principles.
As noted above, ML projects normally do not ﬁt well with commonly used management pro-
cesses, such as Scrum or Waterfall. Therefore it makes sense to consider processes tailored specif-
ically for ML. One such attempt is done by Lavin et. al. [157], who propose Machine Learning
Technology Readiness Levels (MLTRL) framework. MLTRL describes a process of producing ro-
bust ML systems that takes into account key diﬀerences between ML and traditional software
engineering with a speciﬁc focus on the quality of the intermediate outcome of each stage of the
project. As we discussed in Section 5, veriﬁcation is the area of ML deployment that suﬀers from
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

Challenges in Deploying Machine Learning: a Survey of Case Studies
1:21
a lack of standard practices, and in that context MLTRL suggests a possible way to deﬁne such
standards.
A very widespread practice in software engineering is to deﬁne a set of guidelines and best
practices to help developers make decisions at various stages of the development process. These
guidelines can cover a wide range of questions, from variable names to execution environment
setup. For example, Zinkevich [158] compiled a collection of best practices for machine learning
that are utilized in Google. While this cannot be viewed as a coherent paradigm for doing ML
deployment, this document gives practical advice on a variety of important aspects that draw
from the real life experiences of engineers and researchers in the company. Among others, rules
and suggestions for such important deployment topics as monitoring (discussed in Section 6.2),
end user experience (Section 7.3) and infrastructure(Section 6.1) are described.
Besides serving as a collection of advice for common problems, guidelines can also be used as
a way to unify approaches towards deploying ML in a single area. The Association of German
Engineers (VDI) has released a series of guidelines on various aspects of big data applications
in the manufacturing industry [159]. These documents cover a wide range of subjects, including
data quality, modeling, user interfaces, and more. The series aims to harmonize the available tech-
nologies used in the industry, facilitate cooperation and implementation. Such initiatives can help
bridge the gap between ML solutions and regulations in a particular applied area discussed in
Section 7.2 of this survey.
Holistic approaches are created with ML application in mind, and therefore they have the po-
tential to oﬀer signiﬁcant ease of deploying ML. But it should be noted that all such approaches
assume signiﬁcant time investment, because they represent signiﬁcant changes to current norms
in project management and development. Therefore a careful assessment of risks versus beneﬁts
should be carried out before adopting any of them.
9
FURTHER WORK
Even though the set of challenges we reviewed covers every stage of the ML deployment workﬂow,
it is far from complete. Identifying other, especially non-technical, challenges is a natural direction
of further work and could be augmented by conducting interviews with industry representatives
about their experiences of deploying ML.
In this paper, we reviewed reports from a variety of industries, which shows the ubiquity and
variety of challenges with deploying ML in production. An interesting extension would be the
comparative analysis of industries. Quantitative and qualitative analysis of most commonly re-
ported challenges may open interesting transferability opportunities, as approaches developed in
one ﬁeld may be applicable in the other.
Our work includes a brief discussion of existing tools in Section 8.1. However, the community
would beneﬁt from a comprehensive review of currently available tools and services, mapped to
challenges reported in our study. This new work could be combined with our survey to enable
practitioners to identify the problem they are facing and choose the most appropriate tool that
addresses that problem.
10
CONCLUSION
In this survey, we showed that practitioners deal with challenges at every step of the ML deploy-
ment workﬂow due to practical considerations of deploying ML in production. We discussed chal-
lenges that arise during the data management, model learning, model veriﬁcation and model de-
ployment stages, as well as considerations that aﬀect the whole deployment pipeline including
ethics, end users’ trust, law and security. We illustrated each stage with examples across diﬀerent
ﬁelds and industries by reviewing case studies, experience reports and the academic literature.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

1:22
Andrei Paleyes, Raoul-Gabriel Urma, and Neil D. Lawrence
We argue that it is worth the academic community’s time and focus to think about these prob-
lems, rather than expect each applied ﬁeld to ﬁgure out their own approaches. We believe that
ML researchers can drive improvements to the ML deployment experience by exploring holistic
approaches and taking into account practical considerations.
ML shares a lot of similarities with traditional computer science disciplines, and consequently
faces similar challenges, albeit with its own peculiarities. Therefore ML as a ﬁeld would beneﬁt
from a cross-disciplinary dialog with such ﬁelds as software engineering, human-computer inter-
action, systems, policymaking. Many pain points we have described in this work were already
experienced by communities in these ﬁelds, and the ML community should turn to them for solu-
tions and inspiration.
As an observation that follows from the process of collecting papers to review in this survey, we
note the relative shortage of deployment experience reports in the academic literature. Valuable
knowledge obtained by industry ML practitioners goes unpublished. We would like to encourage
organisations to prioritize sharing such reports, as they provide valuable information for the wider
community, but also as a way to self-reﬂect, collect feedback and improve on their own solutions.
Nevertheless, several venues focused ML deployment already exist, and we encourage interested
readers to follow them:
• International Conference Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (ACM SIGKDD), Applied
Data Science track.
• Conference on Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IAAI).
• European Conference on Machine Learning and Principles and Practice of Knowledge Dis-
covery in Databases (ECML PKDD), Applied Data Science track.
• IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA).
• Applied Artiﬁcial Intelligence journal.
• Neural Computing and Applications journal.
We hope this survey will encourage discussions within the academic community about prag-
matic approaches to deploying ML in production.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A.P. and N.L. are grateful for funding from a Senior AI Fellowship from the Alan Turing Institute
(ATI) and UK Research & Innovation (UKRI). We would like to thank our reviewers for thought-
ful and detailed comments that helped improve the paper. We would also like to thank Jessica
Montgomery, Diana Robinson and Ferenc Huszar for insightful discussions.
REFERENCES
[1] Arif Cam, Michael Chui, and Bryce Hall. Global AI survey: AI proves its worth, but few scale impact. McKinsey
Analytics, 2019.
[2] Thomas H. Davenport and Rajeev Ronanki.
Artiﬁcial intelligence for the real world.
Harvard business review,
96(1):108–116, 2018.
[3] Royal Society (Great Britain). Machine Learning: The Power and Promise of Computers that Learn by Example: an
Introduction. Royal Society, 2017.
[4] Michal Pěchouček and Vladimír Mařík. Industrial deployment of multi-agent technologies: review and selected case
studies. Autonomous agents and multi-agent systems, 17(3):397–431, 2008.
[5] Kyle Wiggers. Algorithmia: 50% of companies spend between 8 and 90 days deploying a single AI model, 2019. Avail-
able at https://venturebeat.com/2019/12/11/algorithmia-50-of-companies-spend-upwards-of-three-months-deploying-a-single-ai
[6] Lawrence E. Hecht.
Add it up: How long does a machine learning deployment take?, 2019.
Available at
https://thenewstack.io/add-it-up-how-long-does-a-machine-learning-deployment-take/.
[7] Kyle
Wiggers.
IDC:
For
1 in
4
companies,
half
of
all
AI
projects
fail,
2019.
Available
at
https://venturebeat.com/2019/07/08/idc-for-1-in-4-companies-half-of-all-ai-projects-fail/.
[8] Ben Lorica and Nathan Paco. The State of Machine Learning Adoption in the Enterprise. O’Reilly Media, 2018.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

Challenges in Deploying Machine Learning: a Survey of Case Studies
1:23
[9] The
state
of
development
and
operations
of
AI
applications.
Dotscience,
2019.
Available
at
https://dotscience.com/assets/downloads/Dotscience_Survey-Report-2019.pdf.
[10] Artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning projects are obstructed by data issues. dimensional research, 2019. Avail-
able at https://telecomreseller.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/EMBARGOED-UNTIL-800-AM-ET-0523-Dimensional-Research-
[11] Umang Bhatt, Alice Xiang, Shubham Sharma, Adrian Weller, Ankur Taly, Yunhan Jia, Joydeep Ghosh, Ruchir Puri,
José MF Moura, and Peter Eckersley. Explainable machine learning in deployment. In Proceedings of the 2020 Con-
ference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pages 648–657, 2020.
[12] Saleema Amershi, Andrew Begel, Christian Bird, Robert DeLine, Harald Gall, Ece Kamar, Nachiappan Nagappan,
Besmira Nushi, and Thomas Zimmermann.
Software engineering for machine learning: A case study.
In 2019
IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice (ICSE-SEIP), pages
291–300. IEEE, 2019.
[13] Lucas Baier, Fabian Jöhren, and Stefan Seebacher. Challenges in the deployment and operation of machine learning
in practice. In ECIS, 2019.
[14] Rob Ashmore, Radu Calinescu, and Colin Paterson. Assuring the machine learning lifecycle: Desiderata, methods,
and challenges. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(5):1–39, 2021.
[15] Colin Shearer. The CRISP-DM model: the new blueprint for data mining. Journal of data warehousing, 5(4):13–22,
2000.
[16] WAR Roald Bradley Severtson, L Franks, and G Ericson. What is the team data science process? Microsoft Azure,
2017.
[17] Hironori Takeuchi and Shuichiro Yamamoto. Business analysis method for constructing business–AI alignment
model. Procedia Computer Science, 176:1312–1321, 2020.
[18] Neoklis Polyzotis, Sudip Roy, Steven Euijong Whang, and Martin Zinkevich. Data lifecycle challenges in production
machine learning: a survey. ACM SIGMOD Record, 47(2):17–28, 2018.
[19] Hongming Cai, Boyi Xu, Lihong Jiang, and Athanasios V Vasilakos. IoT-based big data storage systems in cloud
computing: perspectives and challenges. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 4(1):75–87, 2016.
[20] The DELVE Initiative. Data readiness: Lessons from an emergency. Technical report, 2020.
[21] Jimmy Lin and Dmitriy Ryaboy. Scaling big data mining infrastructure: the Twitter experience. ACM SIGKDD
Explorations Newsletter, 14(2):6–19, 2013.
[22] Robert C. Martin. The single responsibility principle. The principles, patterns, and practices of Agile Software Devel-
opment, pages 149–154, 2002.
[23] Ziawasch Abedjan, Xu Chu, Dong Deng, Raul Castro Fernandez, Ihab F. Ilyas, Mourad Ouzzani, Paolo Papotti,
Michael Stonebraker, and Nan Tang. Detecting data errors: Where are we and what needs to be done? Proceed-
ings of the VLDB Endowment, 9(12):993–1004, 2016.
[24] Rajashree Y Patil and RV Kulkarni. A review of data cleaning algorithms for data warehouse systems. International
Journal of Computer Science and Information Technologies, 3(5):5212–5214, 2012.
[25] Fakhitah Ridzuan and Wan Mohd Nazmee Wan Zainon. A review on data cleansing methods for big data. Procedia
Computer Science, 161:731–738, 2019.
[26] Alfredo Nazabal, Christopher KI Williams, Giovanni Colavizza, Camila Rangel Smith, and Angus Williams. Data
engineering for data analytics: a classiﬁcation of the issues, and case studies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12929, 2020.
Unpublished.
[27] Michael Madaio, Shang-Tse Chen, Oliver L. Haimson, Wenwen Zhang, Xiang Cheng, Matthew Hinds-Aldrich,
Duen Horng Chau, and Bistra Dilkina. Firebird: Predicting ﬁre risk and prioritizing ﬁre inspections in Atlanta.
In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages
185–194, 2016.
[28] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, M. Gineste, C. Baudoin, and J. Aguilar. Towards the deployment of machine learning solu-
tions in network traﬃc classiﬁcation: A systematic survey. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 21(2):1988–
2014, 2019.
[29] Maurizio Dusi, Francesco Gringoli, and Luca Salgarelli. Quantifying the accuracy of the ground truth associated
with internet traﬃc traces. Computer Networks, 55(5):1158–1167, 2011.
[30] Samuel Budd, Emma C Robinson, and Bernhard Kainz. A survey on active learning and human-in-the-loop deep
learning for medical image analysis. Medical Image Analysis, 71:102062, 2021.
[31] Jun Du and Charles X Ling. Active learning with human-like noisy oracle. In 2010 IEEE International Conference on
Data Mining, pages 797–802. IEEE, 2010.
[32] Julia Peyre, Josef Sivic, Ivan Laptev, and Cordelia Schmid. Weakly-supervised learning of visual relations. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 5179–5188, 2017.
[33] Wendi Ren, Yinghao Li, Hanting Su, David Kartchner, Cassie Mitchell, and Chao Zhang. Denoising multi-source
weak supervision for neural text classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.04582, 2020. Unpublished.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

1:24
Andrei Paleyes, Raoul-Gabriel Urma, and Neil D. Lawrence
[34] Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Nir Levine, Daniel J Mankowitz, Jerry Li, Cosmin Paduraru, Sven Gowal, and Todd Hes-
ter.
Challenges of real-world reinforcement learning: deﬁnitions, benchmarks and analysis.
Machine Learning,
110(9):2419–2468, 2021.
[35] Sampo Kuutti, Richard Bowden, Yaochu Jin, Phil Barber, and Saber Fallah. A survey of deep learning applications to
autonomous vehicle control. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 22(2):712–733, 2020.
[36] Sean Kandel, Andreas Paepcke, Joseph M. Hellerstein, and Jeﬀrey Heer. Enterprise data analysis and visualization:
An interview study. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 18(12):2917–2926, 2012.
[37] Miryung Kim, Thomas Zimmermann, Robert DeLine, and Andrew Begel. Data scientists in software teams: State of
the art and challenges. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 44(11):1024–1038, 2017.
[38] Diego Charrez. NeurIPS 2019 stats, 2019. Available at https://medium.com/@dcharrezt/neurips-2019-stats-c91346d31c8f .
[39] Malay Haldar, Mustafa Abdool, Prashant Ramanathan, Tao Xu, Shulin Yang, Huizhong Duan, Qing Zhang, Nick
Barrow-Williams, Bradley C. Turnbull, Brendan M. Collins, and et al. Applying deep learning to AirBnB search.
Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Jul 2019.
[40] Kiri L. Wagstaﬀ, Gary Doran, Ashley Davies, Saadat Anwar, Srija Chakraborty, Marissa Cameron, Ingrid Daubar,
and Cynthia Phillips. Enabling onboard detection of events of scientiﬁc interest for the Europa Clipper spacecraft.
In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’19,
page 2191–2201, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery.
[41] Ursula Challita, Henrik Ryden, and Hugo Tullberg. When machine learning meets wireless cellular networks: De-
ployment, challenges, and applications. IEEE Communications Magazine, 58(6):12–18, 2020.
[42] J. Ross Quinlan. Induction of decision trees. Machine learning, 1(1):81–106, 1986.
[43] Karl Hansson, Siril Yella, Mark Dougherty, and Hasan Fleyeh. Machine learning algorithms in heavy process manu-
facturing. American Journal of Intelligent Systems, 6(1):1–13, 2016.
[44] Abbas Keramati, Hajar Ghaneei, and Seyed Mohammad Mirmohammadi. Developing a prediction model for cus-
tomer churn from electronic banking services using data mining. Financial Innovation, 2(1):10, 2016.
[45] Adrian Carrio, Carlos Sampedro, Alejandro Rodriguez-Ramos, and Pascual Campoy. A review of deep learning
methods and applications for unmanned aerial vehicles. Journal of Sensors, 2017, 2017.
[46] Or Sharir, Barak Peleg, and Yoav Shoham. The cost of training NLP models: A concise overview. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.08900, 2020. Unpublished.
[47] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional
Transformers for Language Understanding. In NAACL, 2019.
[48] Nathan Benaich and Ian Hogarth. State of AI report 2020. 2020. Available at www.stateof.ai.
[49] Emma Strubell, Ananya Ganesh, and Andrew McCallum. Energy and policy considerations for deep learning in NLP.
2019.
[50] Emily M Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. On the dangers of stochastic
parrots: Can language models be too big? In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
Transparency, pages 610–623, 2021.
[51] Nicolas Papernot, Patrick McDaniel, Arunesh Sinha, and Michael P Wellman. Sok: Security and privacy in machine
learning. In 2018 IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P), pages 399–414. IEEE, 2018.
[52] Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Membershipinference attacks against machine
learning models. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pages 3–18. IEEE, 2017.
[53] Brendan Avent, Javier González, Tom Diethe, Andrei Paleyes, and Borja Balle. Automatic discovery of privacy–utility
Pareto fronts. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies, 2020(4):5–23, 2020.
[54] Cynthia Dwork. Diﬀerential privacy. In International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, pages
1–12. Springer, 2006.
[55] Craig Gentry. Fully homomorphic encryption using ideal lattices. In Proceedings of the forty-ﬁrst annual ACM
symposium on Theory of computing, pages 169–178, 2009.
[56] Jakub Konečn`y, Brendan McMahan, and Daniel Ramage. Federated optimization: Distributed optimization beyond
the datacenter. OPT Workshop on Optimization for Machine Learning, NIPS, 2015.
[57] Li Yang and Abdallah Shami. On hyperparameter optimization of machine learning algorithms: Theory and practice.
Neurocomputing, 415:295–316, 2020.
[58] Lisha Li, Kevin Jamieson, Giulia DeSalvo, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. Hyperband: A novel bandit-
based approach to hyperparameter optimization. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(1):6765–6816, 2017.
[59] Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P Adams. Practical Bayesian optimization of machine learning algorithms.
In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 2951–2959, 2012.
[60] Bobak Shahriari, AlexandreBouchard-Cote, and Nando Freitas. Unbounded Bayesian optimization via regularization.
In Arthur Gretton and Christian C. Robert, editors, Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Statistics, volume 51 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1168–1176, Cadiz, Spain,
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

Challenges in Deploying Machine Learning: a Survey of Case Studies
1:25
09–11 May 2016. PMLR.
[61] Diana Marculescu, Dimitrios Stamoulis, and Ermao Cai. Hardware-aware machine learning: Modeling and optimiza-
tion. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, ICCAD ’18, New York, NY, USA, 2018.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[62] Lucas Bernardi, Themistoklis Mavridis, and Pablo Estevez. 150 successful machine learning models: 6 lessons learned
at Booking.com. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
Mining, pages 1743–1751, 2019.
[63] Danilo Sato, Arif Wider, and Christoph Windheuser. Continuous delivery for machine learning, 2019. Available at
https://martinfowler.com/articles/cd4ml.html.
[64] Ram Ananth, Seph Mard, and Peter Simon. Opening the “Black Box”: The path to deployment of AI models in
banking, white paper. DataRobot, 2019.
[65] Prudential Regulation Authority. Model risk management principles for stress testing, 2018.
[66] ECB TRIM Guide. Guide for the targeted review of internal models (TRIM). European Central Bank, 2017.
[67] Timothy M Hackett, Sven G Bilén, Paulo Victor Rodrigues Ferreira, Alexander M Wyglinski, Richard C Reinhart, and
Dale J Mortensen. Implementation and on-orbit testing results of a space communications cognitive engine. IEEE
Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, 4(4):825–842, 2018.
[68] Eric Breck, Marty Zinkevich, Neoklis Polyzotis, Steven Whang, and Sudip Roy. Data validation for machine learning.
In Proceedings of SysML, 2019.
[69] Yingnong Dang, Qingwei Lin, and Peng Huang. AIOps: real-world challenges and research innovations. In 2019
IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering: Companion Proceedings (ICSE-Companion), pages
4–5. IEEE, 2019.
[70] Andrew Zhai, Hao-Yu Wu, Eric Tzeng, Dong Huk Park, and Charles Rosenberg. Learning a uniﬁed embedding for
visual search at Pinterest. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
& Data Mining, pages 2412–2420, 2019.
[71] David Sculley, Gary Holt, Daniel Golovin, Eugene Davydov, Todd Phillips, Dietmar Ebner, Vinay Chaudhary, Michael
Young, Jean-Francois Crespo, and Dan Dennison. Hidden technical debt in machine learning systems. In Advances
in neural information processing systems, pages 2503–2511, 2015.
[72] Janis Klaise, Arnaud Van Looveren, Clive Cox, Giovanni Vacanti, and Alexandru Coca. Monitoring and explainability
of models in production. Workshop on Challenges in Deploying and Monitoring Machine Learning Systems, ICML, 2020.
[73] Klaus Ackermann, Joe Walsh, Adolfo De Unánue, Hareem Naveed, Andrea Navarrete Rivera, Sun-Joo Lee, Jason
Bennett, Michael Defoe, Crystal Cody, Lauren Haynes, et al. Deploying machine learning models for public policy:
A framework. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
Mining, pages 15–22, 2018.
[74] Tom Diethe, Tom Borchert, Eno Thereska, Borja Balle, and Neil Lawrence. Continual learning in practice. Workshop
on Continual Learning, NeurIPS, 2018.
[75] Joaquin Quiñonero-Candela, Masashi Sugiyama, Neil D Lawrence, and Anton Schwaighofer. Dataset shift in machine
learning. Mit Press, 2009.
[76] Syed Muslim Jameel, Manzoor Hashmani, Hitham Alhussian, Mobashar Rehman, and Arif Budiman. A critical review
on adverse eﬀects of concept drift over machine learning classiﬁcation models. International Journal of Advanced
Computer Science and Applications, 11, 01 2020.
[77] Bilge Celik and Joaquin Vanschoren. Adaptation strategies for automated machine learning on evolving data. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 43(9):3067–3078, 2021.
[78] Andrés R Masegosa, Ana M Martínez, Darío Ramos-López, Helge Langseth, Thomas D Nielsen, and Antonio
Salmerón. Analyzing concept drift: A case study in the ﬁnancial sector. Intelligent Data Analysis, 24(3):665–688,
2020.
[79] Daniel Langenkämper, Robin van Kevelaer, Autun Purser, and Tim W Nattkemper. Gear-induced concept drift in
marine images and its eﬀect on deep learning classiﬁcation. Frontiers in Marine Science, 7:506, 2020.
[80] Jan Zenisek, Florian Holzinger, and Michael Aﬀenzeller. Machine learningbased concept drift detection for predictive
maintenance. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 137:106031, 2019.
[81] Jeﬀrey C Schlimmer and Richard H Granger. Incremental learning from noisy data. Machine learning, 1(3):317–354,
1986.
[82] Dennis Soemers, Tim Brys, Kurt Driessens, Mark Winands, and Ann Nowé. Adapting to concept drift in credit
card transaction data streams using contextual bandits and decision trees. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
[83] Zijian Sun, Jian Tang, Junfei Qiao, and Chengyu Cui. Review of concept drift detection method for industrial process
modeling. In 2020 39th Chinese Control Conference (CCC), pages 5754–5759. IEEE, 2020.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

1:26
Andrei Paleyes, Raoul-Gabriel Urma, and Neil D. Lawrence
[84] Arif Wider and Christian Deger. Getting smart: Applying continuous delivery to data science to drive car sales, 2017.
Available at https://www.thoughtworks.com/insights/blog/getting-smart-applying-continuous-delivery-data-science-drive-car-s
[85] Gagan Bansal, Besmira Nushi, Ece Kamar, Daniel S Weld, Walter S Lasecki, and Eric Horvitz. Updates in human-AI
teams: Understanding and addressing the performance/compatibility tradeoﬀ. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 33, pages 2429–2437, 2019.
[86] Megha Srivastava, Besmira Nushi, Ece Kamar, Shital Shah, and Eric Horvitz. An empirical analysis of backward
compatibility in machine learning systems. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pages 3272–3280, 2020.
[87] David Leslie. Understanding artiﬁcial intelligence ethics and safety: A guide for the responsible design and imple-
mentation of AI systems in the public sector. Available at SSRN 3403301, 2019.
[88] Cathy O’Neil. Weapons of math destruction: How big data increases inequality and threatens democracy. Broadway
Books, 2016.
[89] Marcelo OR Prates, Pedro H Avelar, and Luís C Lamb. Assessing gender bias in machine translation: a case study
with Google Translate. Neural Computing and Applications, 32(10):6363–6381, 2020.
[90] Robert Soden, Dennis Wagenaar, Dave Luo, and Annegien Tijssen. Taking ethics, fairness, and bias seriously in
machine learning for disaster risk management, 2019. Unpublished.
[91] Sathappan Muthiah, Patrick Butler, Rupinder Paul Khandpur, Parang Saraf, Nathan Self, Alla Rozovskaya, Liang
Zhao, Jose Cadena, Chang-Tien Lu, Anil Vullikanti, et al. Embers at 4 years: Experiences operating an open source
indicators forecasting system. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining, pages 205–214, 2016.
[92] Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial gender classi-
ﬁcation. In Conference on fairness, accountability and transparency, pages 77–91. PMLR, 2018.
[93] Solon Barocas, Moritz Hardt, and Arvind Narayanan. Fairness in machine learning. NIPS Tutorial, 1, 2017.
[94] Nantheera Anantrasirichai and David Bull. Artiﬁcial intelligence in the creative industries: a review. Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Review, pages 1–68, 2021.
[95] Yisroel Mirsky and Wenke Lee. The creation and detection of deepfakes: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR),
54(1):1–41, 2021.
[96] John Mark Michael Rumbold and Barbara Pierscionek. The eﬀect of the general data protection regulation on medical
research. Journal of medical Internet research, 19(2):e47, 2017.
[97] Syed Mohamed Aljunid, Samrit Srithamrongsawat, Wen Chen, Seung Jin Bae, Raoh-Fang Pwu, Shunya Ikeda, and
Ling Xu. Health-care data collecting, sharing, and using in Thailand, China mainland, South Korea, Taiwan, Japan,
and Malaysia. Value in Health, 15(1):S132–S138, 2012.
[98] Changhee Han, Leonardo Rundo, Kohei Murao, Takafumi Nemoto, and Hideki Nakayama. Bridging the gap between
AI and healthcare sides: towards developing clinically relevant AI-powered diagnosis systems. In IFIP International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence Applications and Innovations, pages 320–333. Springer, 2020.
[99] Gary E Marchant. The growing gap between emerging technologies and the law. In The growing gap between
emerging technologies and legal-ethical oversight, pages 19–33. Springer, 2011.
[100] D Malan et al. Values and the fourth industrial revolution: Connecting the dots between value, values, proﬁt and
purpose. In World Economic Forum, 2016.
[101] Daniel Malan. The law can’t keep up with new tech. Here’s how to close the gap. In World Economic Forum, volume 21,
2018.
[102] Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt, and Luciano Floridi. Why a right to explanation of automated decision-making
does not exist in the general data protection regulation. International Data Privacy Law, 7(2):76–99, 2017.
[103] Timo Minssen, Sara Gerke, Mateo Aboy, Nicholson Price, and Glenn Cohen. Regulatory responses to medical ma-
chine learning. Journal of Law and the Biosciences, 2020.
[104] Keri Stephens. FDA releases artiﬁcial intelligence/machine learning action plan. AXIS Imaging News, 2021.
[105] Mustafa Suleyman and Dominic King. The Information Commissioner, the Royal Free, and what we’ve learned, 2017.
[106] M-C Laï, M Brian, and M-F Mamzer. Perceptions of artiﬁcial intelligence in healthcare: ﬁndings from a qualitative
survey study among actors in France. Journal of Translational Medicine, 18(1):1–13, 2020.
[107] Ramprakash Ramamoorthy, P Satya Madhuri, and Malini Christina Raj. AI from labs to production - challenges and
learnings. Santa Clara, CA, May 2019. USENIX Association.
[108] Mark Sendak, Madeleine Clare Elish, Michael Gao, Joseph Futoma, William Ratliﬀ, Marshall Nichols, Armando
Bedoya, Suresh Balu, and Cara O’Brien. “The human body is a black box”: Supporting clinical decision-making
with deep learning. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAT* ’20,
page 99–109, New York, NY, USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machinery.
[109] Information
Commissioner’s
Oﬃce.
Project
ExplAIn
interim
report,
2019.
Available
at
https://ico.org.uk/about-the-ico/research-and-reports/project-explain-interim-report/.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

Challenges in Deploying Machine Learning: a Survey of Case Studies
1:27
[110] Daniel Mutembesa, Christopher Omongo, and Ernest Mwebaze. Crowdsourcing real-time viral disease and pest
information: A case of nation-wide cassava disease surveillance in a developing country. In Sixth AAAI Conference
on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing, 2018.
[111] Cynthia Rudin. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and use interpretable
models instead. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(5):206–215, 2019.
[112] Wei Wang, Christopher Lesner, Alexander Ran, Marko Rukonic, Jason Xue, and Eric Shiu. Using small business
banking data for explainable credit risk scoring. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
volume 34, pages 13396–13401, 2020.
[113] Dakuo Wang, Liuping Wang, Zhan Zhang, Ding Wang, Haiyi Zhu, Yvonne Gao, Xiangmin Fan, and Feng Tian.
“Brilliant AI Doctor” in Rural Clinics: Challenges in AI-Powered Clinical Decision Support System Deployment. In
Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–18, 2021.
[114] Ram Shankar Siva Kumar, David O Brien, Kendra Albert, Salomé Viljöen, and Jeﬀrey Snover. Failure modes in
machine learning systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.11034, 2019. Unpublished.
[115] Battista Biggio and Fabio Roli. Wild patterns: Ten years after the rise of adversarial machine learning. Pattern
Recognition, 84:317–331, 2018.
[116] Alexey Kurakin, Ian Goodfellow, and Samy Bengio. Adversarial machine learning at scale. International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2017.
[117] Ram Shankar Siva Kumar, Magnus Nystrom, John Lambert, Andrew Marshall, Mario Goertzel, Andi Comissoneru,
Matt Swann, and Sharon Xia. Adversarial machine learning-industry perspectives. Available at SSRN 3532474, 2020.
[118] Blaine Nelson, Marco Barreno, Fuching Jack Chi, Anthony D Joseph, Benjamin IP Rubinstein, Udam Saini, Charles
Sutton, J Doug Tygar, and Kai Xia. Exploiting machine learning to subvert your spam ﬁlter. LEET, 8:1–9, 2008.
[119] Matthew Jagielski, Alina Oprea, Battista Biggio, Chang Liu, Cristina Nita-Rotaru, and Bo Li. Manipulating machine
learning: Poisoning attacks and countermeasures for regression learning. In 2018 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (SP), pages 19–35. IEEE, 2018.
[120] Oscar Schwartz. In 2016 Microsoft’s racist chatbot revealed the dangers of online conversation. IEEE Spectrum, 11,
2019.
[121] Florian Tramèr, Fan Zhang, Ari Juels, Michael K Reiter, and Thomas Ristenpart. Stealing machine learning models
via prediction APIs. In 25th {USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security 16), pages 601–618, 2016.
[122] Matt Fredrikson, Somesh Jha, and Thomas Ristenpart. Model inversion attacks that exploit conﬁdence information
and basic countermeasures. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, pages 1322–1333, 2015.
[123] Michael Veale, Reuben Binns, and Lilian Edwards. Algorithms that remember: model inversion attacks and data
protection law. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences,
376(2133):20180083, 2018.
[124] Chip Huyen.
What I learned from looking at 200 machine learning tools, 2020.
Available at
https://huyenchip.com/2020/06/22/mlops.html.
[125] Kumar Venkateswar. Using amazon SageMaker to operationalize machine learning. Santa Clara, CA, 2019. USENIX
Association.
[126] AML Team. AzureML: Anatomy of a machine learning service. In Conference on Predictive APIs and Apps, pages
1–13, 2016.
[127] Jeremy Hermann and Mike Del Balso.
Meet Michelangelo: Uber’s machine learning platform.
URL
https://eng.uber.com/michelangelo, 2017.
[128] Denis Baylor, Kevin Haas, Konstantinos Katsiapis, Sammy Leong, Rose Liu, Clemens Menwald, Hui Miao, Neoklis
Polyzotis, Mitchell Trott, and Martin Zinkevich. Continuous training for production ML in the TensorFlow extended
(TFX) platform. In 2019 {USENIX} Conference on Operational Machine Learning (OpML 19), pages 51–53, 2019.
[129] Matei Zaharia, Andrew Chen, Aaron Davidson, Ali Ghodsi, Sue Ann Hong, Andy Konwinski, Siddharth Murching,
Tomas Nykodym, Paul Ogilvie, Mani Parkhe, et al. Accelerating the machine learning lifecycle with MLﬂow. IEEE
Data Eng. Bull., 41(4):39–45, 2018.
[130] Sebastian Schelter, Tammo Rukat, and Felix Biessmann. JENGA-a framework to study the impact of data errors on
the predictions of machine learning models. 2021.
[131] Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Tongshuang Wu, Carlos Guestrin, and Sameer Singh. Beyond accuracy: Behavioral testing of
NLP models with CheckList. In Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2020.
[132] Nick Hynes, D Sculley, and Michael Terry. The Data Linter: Lightweight, automated sanity checking for ML data
sets. In NIPS MLSys Workshop, 2017.
[133] Stephen H Bach, Daniel Rodriguez, Yintao Liu, Chong Luo, Haidong Shao, Cassandra Xia, Souvik Sen, Alex Ratner,
Braden Hancock, Houman Alborzi, et al. Snorkel DryBell: A case study in deploying weak supervision at industrial
scale. In Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Management of Data, pages 362–375, 2019.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

1:28
Andrei Paleyes, Raoul-Gabriel Urma, and Neil D. Lawrence
[134] Paroma Varma and Christopher Ré. Snuba: Automating weak supervision to label training data. In Proceedings of
the VLDB Endowment. International Conference on Very Large Data Bases, volume 12, page 223. NIH Public Access,
2018.
[135] Curtis Northcutt, Lu Jiang, and Isaac Chuang. Conﬁdent learning: Estimating uncertainty in dataset labels. Journal
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 70:1373–1411, 2021.
[136] Yaliang Li, Zhen Wang, Bolin Ding, and Ce Zhang. AutoML: A perspective where industry meets academy. In
Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pages 4048–4049, 2021.
[137] Haifeng Jin, Qingquan Song, and Xia Hu. Auto-keras: An eﬃcient neural architecture search system. In Proceedings
of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pages 1946–1956, 2019.
[138] Matthias Feurer, Aaron Klein, Katharina Eggensperger, Jost Springenberg, Manuel Blum, and Frank Hutter. Eﬃcient
and robust automated machine learning. In C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, and R. Garnett, editors,
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 28. Curran Associates, Inc., 2015.
[139] Randal S Olson and Jason H Moore. TPOT: A tree-based pipeline optimization tool for automating machine learning.
In Workshop on automatic machine learning, pages 66–74. PMLR, 2016.
[140] Ashkan Ebadi, Yvan Gauthier, Stéphane Tremblay, and Patrick Paul. How can automated machine learning help
business data science teams? In 2019 18th IEEE International Conference On Machine Learning And Applications
(ICMLA), pages 1186–1191. IEEE, 2019.
[141] Livia Faes, Siegfried K Wagner, Dun Jack Fu, Xiaoxuan Liu, Edward Korot, Joseph R Ledsam, Trevor Back, Reena
Chopra, Nikolas Pontikos, Christoph Kern, et al. Automated deep learning design for medical image classiﬁcation by
health-care professionals with no coding experience: a feasibility study. The Lancet Digital Health, 1(5):e232–e242,
2019.
[142] Stephan Rabanser, Stephan Günnemann, and Zachary Chase Lipton. Failing loudly: An empirical study of methods
for detecting dataset shift. In NeurIPS, 2019.
[143] Arnaud Van Looveren, Janis Klaise, Giovanni Vacanti, Oliver Cobb, Ashley Scillitoe, and Robert Samoilescu. Alibi
Detect: Algorithms for outlier, adversarial and drift detection, 3 2022.
[144] João Gama, Indr˙e Žliobait˙e, Albert Bifet, Mykola Pechenizkiy, and Abdelhamid Bouchachia. A survey on concept
drift adaptation. ACM computing surveys (CSUR), 46(4):1–37, 2014.
[145] Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep networks.
In International conference on machine learning, pages 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017.
[146] Peilin Zhao, Steven CH Hoi, Jialei Wang, and Bin Li. Online transfer learning. Artiﬁcial intelligence, 216:76–102,
2014.
[147] Ge Xie, Yu Sun, Minlong Lin, and Ke Tang. A selective transfer learning method for concept drift adaptation. In
International Symposium on Neural Networks, pages 353–361. Springer, 2017.
[148] A Zujus. AI project development–how project managers should prepare. Tratto il giorno Agosto, 31:2019, 2018.
[149] Amine Barrak, Ellis E Eghan, and Bram Adams. On the co-evolution of ML pipelines and source code–empirical study
of DVC projects. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER),
pages 422–433. IEEE, 2021.
[150] Neil D Lawrence. Data readiness levels. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.02245, 2017. Unpublished.
[151] Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach, Hal Daumé III,
and Kate Crawford. Datasheets for datasets. Communications of the ACM, 64(12):86–92, 2021.
[152] Ruslan Kuprieiev, Saugat Pachhai, Dmitry Petrov, Paweł Redzyński, Casper da Costa-Luis, Peter Rowlands, Alexan-
der Schepanovski, Ivan Shcheklein, Batuhan Taskaya, Jorge Orpinel, Gao, Fábio Santos, David de la Iglesia Castro,
Aman Sharma, Zhanibek, Dani Hodovic, Nikita Kodenko, Andrew Grigorev, Earl, Nabanita Dash, George Vyshnya,
maykulkarni, Max Hora, Vera, Sanidhya Mangal, Wojciech Baranowski, Clemens Wolﬀ, and Kurian Benoy. DVC:
Data version control - Git for data & models, February 2022.
[153] Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar, Parker Barnes, Lucy Vasserman, Ben Hutchinson, Elena Spitzer,
Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Timnit Gebru. Model cards for model reporting. In Proceedings of the conference on
fairness, accountability, and transparency, pages 220–229, 2019.
[154] Neil
Lawrence.
Modern
data
oriented
programming,
2019.
Available
at
http://inverseprobability.com/talks/notes/modern-data-oriented-programming.html.
[155] Tom
Borchert.
Milan:
An
evolution
of
data-oriented
programming,
2020.
Available
at
https://tborchertblog.wordpress.com/2020/02/13/28/.
[156] Andrei Paleyes, Christian Cabrera, and Neil D Lawrence. Towards better data discovery and collection with ﬂow-
based programming. Data-centric AI workshop, NeurIPS, 2021.
[157] Alexander Lavin, Ciarán M. Gilligan-Lee, Alessya Visnjic, Siddha Ganju, Dava Newman, Sujoy Ganguly, Danny
Lange, Atılım Güneş Baydin, Amit Sharma, Adam Gibson, Yarin Gal, Eric P. Xing, Chris Mattmann, and James Parr.
Technology readiness levels for machine learning systems, 2021. Unpublished.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.

Challenges in Deploying Machine Learning: a Survey of Case Studies
1:29
[158] Martin Zinkevich. Rules of machine learning: Best practices for ML engineering. URL: https://developers. google.
com/machine-learning/guides/rules-of-ml, 2017.
[159] Verein Deutscher Ingenieure (VDI).
Einsatz von Big Data in produzierenden Industrien, 2019.
Available at
https://www.vdi.de/news/detail/einsatz-von-big-data-in-produzierenden-industrien.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2022.
